The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Prince, by Nicolo Machiavelli

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Prince

Author: Nicolo Machiavelli

Translator: W. K. Marriott

Release Date: February 11, 2006 [EBook #1232]
Last updated: August 26, 2016

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCE ***




Produced by John Bickers, David Widger and Others





THE PRINCE

by Nicolo Machiavelli

Translated by W. K. Marriott


Nicolo Machiavelli, born at Florence on 3rd May 1469. From 1494 to 1512
held an official post at Florence which included diplomatic missions to
various European courts. Imprisoned in Florence, 1512; later exiled and
returned to San Casciano. Died at Florence on 22nd June 1527.




INTRODUCTION

Nicolo Machiavelli was born at Florence on 3rd May 1469. He was the
second son of Bernardo di Nicolo Machiavelli, a lawyer of some repute,
and of Bartolommea di Stefano Nelli, his wife. Both parents were members
of the old Florentine nobility.

His life falls naturally into three periods, each of which singularly
enough constitutes a distinct and important era in the history of
Florence. His youth was concurrent with the greatness of Florence as an
Italian power under the guidance of Lorenzo de' Medici, Il Magnifico.
The downfall of the Medici in Florence occurred in 1494, in which year
Machiavelli entered the public service. During his official career
Florence was free under the government of a Republic, which lasted
until 1512, when the Medici returned to power, and Machiavelli lost his
office. The Medici again ruled Florence from 1512 until 1527, when they
were once more driven out. This was the period of Machiavelli's literary
activity and increasing influence; but he died, within a few weeks of
the expulsion of the Medici, on 22nd June 1527, in his fifty-eighth
year, without having regained office.




YOUTH -- Aet. 1-25--1469-94

Although there is little recorded of the youth of Machiavelli, the
Florence of those days is so well known that the early environment of
this representative citizen may be easily imagined. Florence has been
described as a city with two opposite currents of life, one directed by
the fervent and austere Savonarola, the other by the splendour-loving
Lorenzo. Savonarola's influence upon the young Machiavelli must have
been slight, for although at one time he wielded immense power over the
fortunes of Florence, he only furnished Machiavelli with a subject of
a gibe in "The Prince," where he is cited as an example of an unarmed
prophet who came to a bad end. Whereas the magnificence of the Medicean
rule during the life of Lorenzo appeared to have impressed Machiavelli
strongly, for he frequently recurs to it in his writings, and it is to
Lorenzo's grandson that he dedicates "The Prince."

Machiavelli, in his "History of Florence," gives us a picture of the
young men among whom his youth was passed. He writes: "They were freer
than their forefathers in dress and living, and spent more in other
kinds of excesses, consuming their time and money in idleness, gaming,
and women; their chief aim was to appear well dressed and to speak with
wit and acuteness, whilst he who could wound others the most cleverly
was thought the wisest." In a letter to his son Guido, Machiavelli shows
why youth should avail itself of its opportunities for study, and leads
us to infer that his own youth had been so occupied. He writes: "I
have received your letter, which has given me the greatest pleasure,
especially because you tell me you are quite restored in health, than
which I could have no better news; for if God grant life to you, and
to me, I hope to make a good man of you if you are willing to do your
share." Then, writing of a new patron, he continues: "This will turn
out well for you, but it is necessary for you to study; since, then, you
have no longer the excuse of illness, take pains to study letters and
music, for you see what honour is done to me for the little skill I
have. Therefore, my son, if you wish to please me, and to bring success
and honour to yourself, do right and study, because others will help you
if you help yourself."




OFFICE -- Aet. 25-43--1494-1512

The second period of Machiavelli's life was spent in the service of the
free Republic of Florence, which flourished, as stated above, from
the expulsion of the Medici in 1494 until their return in 1512. After
serving four years in one of the public offices he was appointed
Chancellor and Secretary to the Second Chancery, the Ten of Liberty
and Peace. Here we are on firm ground when dealing with the events of
Machiavelli's life, for during this time he took a leading part in
the affairs of the Republic, and we have its decrees, records,
and dispatches to guide us, as well as his own writings. A mere
recapitulation of a few of his transactions with the statesmen and
soldiers of his time gives a fair indication of his activities, and
supplies the sources from which he drew the experiences and characters
which illustrate "The Prince."

His first mission was in 1499 to Catherina Sforza, "my lady of Forli" of
"The Prince," from whose conduct and fate he drew the moral that it
is far better to earn the confidence of the people than to rely on
fortresses. This is a very noticeable principle in Machiavelli, and is
urged by him in many ways as a matter of vital importance to princes.

In 1500 he was sent to France to obtain terms from Louis XII for
continuing the war against Pisa: this king it was who, in his conduct
of affairs in Italy, committed the five capital errors in statecraft
summarized in "The Prince," and was consequently driven out. He, also,
it was who made the dissolution of his marriage a condition of support
to Pope Alexander VI; which leads Machiavelli to refer those who urge
that such promises should be kept to what he has written concerning the
faith of princes.

Machiavelli's public life was largely occupied with events arising out
of the ambitions of Pope Alexander VI and his son, Cesare Borgia, the
Duke Valentino, and these characters fill a large space of "The Prince."
Machiavelli never hesitates to cite the actions of the duke for the
benefit of usurpers who wish to keep the states they have seized; he
can, indeed, find no precepts to offer so good as the pattern of Cesare
Borgia's conduct, insomuch that Cesare is acclaimed by some critics as
the "hero" of "The Prince." Yet in "The Prince" the duke is in point of
fact cited as a type of the man who rises on the fortune of others, and
falls with them; who takes every course that might be expected from a
prudent man but the course which will save him; who is prepared for all
eventualities but the one which happens; and who, when all his abilities
fail to carry him through, exclaims that it was not his fault, but an
extraordinary and unforeseen fatality.

On the death of Pius III, in 1503, Machiavelli was sent to Rome to watch
the election of his successor, and there he saw Cesare Borgia cheated
into allowing the choice of the College to fall on Giuliano delle Rovere
(Julius II), who was one of the cardinals that had most reason to fear
the duke. Machiavelli, when commenting on this election, says that
he who thinks new favours will cause great personages to forget old
injuries deceives himself. Julius did not rest until he had ruined
Cesare.

It was to Julius II that Machiavelli was sent in 1506, when that pontiff
was commencing his enterprise against Bologna; which he brought to a
successful issue, as he did many of his other adventures, owing chiefly
to his impetuous character. It is in reference to Pope Julius that
Machiavelli moralizes on the resemblance between Fortune and women, and
concludes that it is the bold rather than the cautious man that will win
and hold them both.

It is impossible to follow here the varying fortunes of the Italian
states, which in 1507 were controlled by France, Spain, and Germany,
with results that have lasted to our day; we are concerned with those
events, and with the three great actors in them, so far only as they
impinge on the personality of Machiavelli. He had several meetings with
Louis XII of France, and his estimate of that monarch's character has
already been alluded to. Machiavelli has painted Ferdinand of Aragon as
the man who accomplished great things under the cloak of religion, but
who in reality had no mercy, faith, humanity, or integrity; and who,
had he allowed himself to be influenced by such motives, would have been
ruined. The Emperor Maximilian was one of the most interesting men
of the age, and his character has been drawn by many hands; but
Machiavelli, who was an envoy at his court in 1507-8, reveals the secret
of his many failures when he describes him as a secretive man, without
force of character--ignoring the human agencies necessary to carry
his schemes into effect, and never insisting on the fulfilment of his
wishes.

The remaining years of Machiavelli's official career were filled with
events arising out of the League of Cambrai, made in 1508 between the
three great European powers already mentioned and the pope, with the
object of crushing the Venetian Republic. This result was attained in
the battle of Vaila, when Venice lost in one day all that she had won in
eight hundred years. Florence had a difficult part to play during these
events, complicated as they were by the feud which broke out between
the pope and the French, because friendship with France had dictated the
entire policy of the Republic. When, in 1511, Julius II finally formed
the Holy League against France, and with the assistance of the Swiss
drove the French out of Italy, Florence lay at the mercy of the Pope,
and had to submit to his terms, one of which was that the Medici should
be restored. The return of the Medici to Florence on 1st September
1512, and the consequent fall of the Republic, was the signal for the
dismissal of Machiavelli and his friends, and thus put an end to his
public career, for, as we have seen, he died without regaining office.




LITERATURE AND DEATH -- Aet. 43-58--1512-27

On the return of the Medici, Machiavelli, who for a few weeks had
vainly hoped to retain his office under the new masters of Florence, was
dismissed by decree dated 7th November 1512. Shortly after this he was
accused of complicity in an abortive conspiracy against the Medici,
imprisoned, and put to the question by torture. The new Medicean pope,
Leo X, procured his release, and he retired to his small property at San
Casciano, near Florence, where he devoted himself to literature. In a
letter to Francesco Vettori, dated 13th December 1513, he has left
a very interesting description of his life at this period, which
elucidates his methods and his motives in writing "The Prince." After
describing his daily occupations with his family and neighbours, he
writes: "The evening being come, I return home and go to my study; at
the entrance I pull off my peasant-clothes, covered with dust and dirt,
and put on my noble court dress, and thus becomingly re-clothed I
pass into the ancient courts of the men of old, where, being lovingly
received by them, I am fed with that food which is mine alone; where I
do not hesitate to speak with them, and to ask for the reason of their
actions, and they in their benignity answer me; and for four hours I
feel no weariness, I forget every trouble, poverty does not dismay,
death does not terrify me; I am possessed entirely by those great men.
And because Dante says:

     Knowledge doth come of learning well retained,
     Unfruitful else,

I have noted down what I have gained from their conversation, and have
composed a small work on 'Principalities,' where I pour myself out
as fully as I can in meditation on the subject, discussing what a
principality is, what kinds there are, how they can be acquired, how
they can be kept, why they are lost: and if any of my fancies ever
pleased you, this ought not to displease you: and to a prince,
especially to a new one, it should be welcome: therefore I dedicate it
to his Magnificence Giuliano. Filippo Casavecchio has seen it; he will
be able to tell you what is in it, and of the discourses I have had with
him; nevertheless, I am still enriching and polishing it."

The "little book" suffered many vicissitudes before attaining the form
in which it has reached us. Various mental influences were at work
during its composition; its title and patron were changed; and for some
unknown reason it was finally dedicated to Lorenzo de' Medici. Although
Machiavelli discussed with Casavecchio whether it should be sent or
presented in person to the patron, there is no evidence that Lorenzo
ever received or even read it: he certainly never gave Machiavelli any
employment. Although it was plagiarized during Machiavelli's lifetime,
"The Prince" was never published by him, and its text is still
disputable.

Machiavelli concludes his letter to Vettori thus: "And as to this little
thing [his book], when it has been read it will be seen that during the
fifteen years I have given to the study of statecraft I have neither
slept nor idled; and men ought ever to desire to be served by one who
has reaped experience at the expense of others. And of my loyalty none
could doubt, because having always kept faith I could not now learn how
to break it; for he who has been faithful and honest, as I have, cannot
change his nature; and my poverty is a witness to my honesty."

Before Machiavelli had got "The Prince" off his hands he commenced his
"Discourse on the First Decade of Titus Livius," which should be read
concurrently with "The Prince." These and several minor works occupied
him until the year 1518, when he accepted a small commission to look
after the affairs of some Florentine merchants at Genoa. In 1519 the
Medicean rulers of Florence granted a few political concessions to
her citizens, and Machiavelli with others was consulted upon a new
constitution under which the Great Council was to be restored; but on
one pretext or another it was not promulgated.

In 1520 the Florentine merchants again had recourse to Machiavelli
to settle their difficulties with Lucca, but this year was chiefly
remarkable for his re-entry into Florentine literary society, where he
was much sought after, and also for the production of his "Art of War."
It was in the same year that he received a commission at the instance
of Cardinal de' Medici to write the "History of Florence," a task
which occupied him until 1525. His return to popular favour may have
determined the Medici to give him this employment, for an old writer
observes that "an able statesman out of work, like a huge whale, will
endeavour to overturn the ship unless he has an empty cask to play
with."

When the "History of Florence" was finished, Machiavelli took it to
Rome for presentation to his patron, Giuliano de' Medici, who had in
the meanwhile become pope under the title of Clement VII. It is somewhat
remarkable that, as, in 1513, Machiavelli had written "The Prince" for
the instruction of the Medici after they had just regained power in
Florence, so, in 1525, he dedicated the "History of Florence" to the
head of the family when its ruin was now at hand. In that year the
battle of Pavia destroyed the French rule in Italy, and left Francis I
a prisoner in the hands of his great rival, Charles V. This was followed
by the sack of Rome, upon the news of which the popular party at
Florence threw off the yoke of the Medici, who were once more banished.

Machiavelli was absent from Florence at this time, but hastened his
return, hoping to secure his former office of secretary to the "Ten of
Liberty and Peace." Unhappily he was taken ill soon after he reached
Florence, where he died on 22nd June 1527.




THE MAN AND HIS WORKS

No one can say where the bones of Machiavelli rest, but modern Florence
has decreed him a stately cenotaph in Santa Croce, by the side of her
most famous sons; recognizing that, whatever other nations may have
found in his works, Italy found in them the idea of her unity and the
germs of her renaissance among the nations of Europe. Whilst it is idle
to protest against the world-wide and evil signification of his name,
it may be pointed out that the harsh construction of his doctrine which
this sinister reputation implies was unknown to his own day, and that
the researches of recent times have enabled us to interpret him more
reasonably. It is due to these inquiries that the shape of an "unholy
necromancer," which so long haunted men's vision, has begun to fade.

Machiavelli was undoubtedly a man of great observation, acuteness, and
industry; noting with appreciative eye whatever passed before him, and
with his supreme literary gift turning it to account in his enforced
retirement from affairs. He does not present himself, nor is he
depicted by his contemporaries, as a type of that rare combination,
the successful statesman and author, for he appears to have been
only moderately prosperous in his several embassies and political
employments. He was misled by Catherina Sforza, ignored by Louis XII,
overawed by Cesare Borgia; several of his embassies were quite barren of
results; his attempts to fortify Florence failed, and the soldiery that
he raised astonished everybody by their cowardice. In the conduct of his
own affairs he was timid and time-serving; he dared not appear by the
side of Soderini, to whom he owed so much, for fear of compromising
himself; his connection with the Medici was open to suspicion, and
Giuliano appears to have recognized his real forte when he set him to
write the "History of Florence," rather than employ him in the state.
And it is on the literary side of his character, and there alone, that
we find no weakness and no failure.

Although the light of almost four centuries has been focused on "The
Prince," its problems are still debatable and interesting, because they
are the eternal problems between the ruled and their rulers. Such as
they are, its ethics are those of Machiavelli's contemporaries; yet they
cannot be said to be out of date so long as the governments of Europe
rely on material rather than on moral forces. Its historical incidents
and personages become interesting by reason of the uses which
Machiavelli makes of them to illustrate his theories of government and
conduct.

Leaving out of consideration those maxims of state which still furnish
some European and eastern statesmen with principles of action, "The
Prince" is bestrewn with truths that can be proved at every turn. Men
are still the dupes of their simplicity and greed, as they were in the
days of Alexander VI. The cloak of religion still conceals the vices
which Machiavelli laid bare in the character of Ferdinand of Aragon.
Men will not look at things as they really are, but as they wish them
to be--and are ruined. In politics there are no perfectly safe courses;
prudence consists in choosing the least dangerous ones. Then--to pass to
a higher plane--Machiavelli reiterates that, although crimes may win
an empire, they do not win glory. Necessary wars are just wars, and
the arms of a nation are hallowed when it has no other resource but to
fight.

It is the cry of a far later day than Machiavelli's that government
should be elevated into a living moral force, capable of inspiring the
people with a just recognition of the fundamental principles of society;
to this "high argument" "The Prince" contributes but little. Machiavelli
always refused to write either of men or of governments otherwise than
as he found them, and he writes with such skill and insight that his
work is of abiding value. But what invests "The Prince" with more than
a merely artistic or historical interest is the incontrovertible truth
that it deals with the great principles which still guide nations and
rulers in their relationship with each other and their neighbours.

In translating "The Prince" my aim has been to achieve at all costs an
exact literal rendering of the original, rather than a fluent paraphrase
adapted to the modern notions of style and expression. Machiavelli was
no facile phrasemonger; the conditions under which he wrote obliged him
to weigh every word; his themes were lofty, his substance grave, his
manner nobly plain and serious. "Quis eo fuit unquam in partiundis
rebus, in definiendis, in explanandis pressior?" In "The Prince," it may
be truly said, there is reason assignable, not only for every word, but
for the position of every word. To an Englishman of Shakespeare's time
the translation of such a treatise was in some ways a comparatively easy
task, for in those times the genius of the English more nearly resembled
that of the Italian language; to the Englishman of to-day it is not so
simple. To take a single example: the word "intrattenere," employed by
Machiavelli to indicate the policy adopted by the Roman Senate towards
the weaker states of Greece, would by an Elizabethan be correctly
rendered "entertain," and every contemporary reader would understand
what was meant by saying that "Rome entertained the Aetolians and the
Achaeans without augmenting their power." But to-day such a phrase would
seem obsolete and ambiguous, if not unmeaning: we are compelled to say
that "Rome maintained friendly relations with the Aetolians," etc.,
using four words to do the work of one. I have tried to preserve the
pithy brevity of the Italian so far as was consistent with an absolute
fidelity to the sense. If the result be an occasional asperity I can
only hope that the reader, in his eagerness to reach the author's
meaning, may overlook the roughness of the road that leads him to it.

The following is a list of the works of Machiavelli:

Principal works. Discorso sopra le cose di Pisa, 1499; Del modo di
trattare i popoli della Valdichiana ribellati, 1502; Del modo tenuto dal
duca Valentino nell' ammazzare Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto da Fermo,
etc., 1502; Discorso sopra la provisione del danaro, 1502; Decennale
primo (poem in terza rima), 1506; Ritratti delle cose dell' Alemagna,
1508-12; Decennale secondo, 1509; Ritratti delle cose di Francia, 1510;
Discorsi sopra la prima deca di T. Livio, 3 vols., 1512-17; Il Principe,
1513; Andria, comedy translated from Terence, 1513 (?); Mandragola,
prose comedy in five acts, with prologue in verse, 1513; Della
lingua (dialogue), 1514; Clizia, comedy in prose, 1515 (?); Belfagor
arcidiavolo (novel), 1515; Asino d'oro (poem in terza rima), 1517; Dell'
arte della guerra, 1519-20; Discorso sopra il riformare lo stato di
Firenze, 1520; Sommario delle cose della citta di Lucca, 1520; Vita
di Castruccio Castracani da Lucca, 1520; Istorie fiorentine, 8 books,
1521-5; Frammenti storici, 1525.

Other poems include Sonetti, Canzoni, Ottave, and Canti carnascialeschi.

Editions. Aldo, Venice, 1546; della Tertina, 1550; Cambiagi, Florence, 6
vols., 1782-5; dei Classici, Milan, 10 1813; Silvestri, 9 vols., 1820-2;
Passerini, Fanfani, Milanesi, 6 vols. only published, 1873-7.

Minor works. Ed. F. L. Polidori, 1852; Lettere familiari, ed. E.
Alvisi, 1883, 2 editions, one with excisions; Credited Writings, ed.
G. Canestrini, 1857; Letters to F. Vettori, see A. Ridolfi, Pensieri
intorno allo scopo di N. Machiavelli nel libro Il Principe, etc.; D.
Ferrara, The Private Correspondence of Nicolo Machiavelli, 1929.




DEDICATION

     To the Magnificent Lorenzo Di Piero De' Medici:

     Those who strive to obtain the good graces of a prince are
     accustomed to come before him with such things as they hold most
     precious, or in which they see him take most delight; whence one
     often sees horses, arms, cloth of gold, precious stones, and
     similar ornaments presented to princes, worthy of their greatness.

     Desiring therefore to present myself to your Magnificence with
     some testimony of my devotion towards you, I have not found among
     my possessions anything which I hold more dear than, or value so
     much as, the knowledge of the actions of great men, acquired by
     long experience in contemporary affairs, and a continual study of
     antiquity; which, having reflected upon it with great and
     prolonged diligence, I now send, digested into a little volume, to
     your Magnificence.

     And although I may consider this work unworthy of your
     countenance, nevertheless I trust much to your benignity that it
     may be acceptable, seeing that it is not possible for me to make a
     better gift than to offer you the opportunity of understanding in
     the shortest time all that I have learnt in so many years, and
     with so many troubles and dangers; which work I have not
     embellished with swelling or magnificent words, nor stuffed with
     rounded periods, nor with any extrinsic allurements or adornments
     whatever, with which so many are accustomed to embellish their
     works; for I have wished either that no honour should be given it,
     or else that the truth of the matter and the weightiness of the
     theme shall make it acceptable.

     Nor do I hold with those who regard it as a presumption if a man
     of low and humble condition dare to discuss and settle the
     concerns of princes; because, just as those who draw landscapes
     place themselves below in the plain to contemplate the nature of
     the mountains and of lofty places, and in order to contemplate the
     plains place themselves upon high mountains, even so to understand
     the nature of the people it needs to be a prince, and to
     understand that of princes it needs to be of the people.

     Take then, your Magnificence, this little gift in the spirit in
     which I send it; wherein, if it be diligently read and considered
     by you, you will learn my extreme desire that you should attain
     that greatness which fortune and your other attributes promise.
     And if your Magnificence from the summit of your greatness will
     sometimes turn your eyes to these lower regions, you will see how
     unmeritedly I suffer a great and continued malignity of fortune.




THE PRINCE




CHAPTER I -- HOW MANY KINDS OF PRINCIPALITIES THERE ARE, AND BY WHAT
MEANS THEY ARE ACQUIRED

All states, all powers, that have held and hold rule over men have been
and are either republics or principalities.

Principalities are either hereditary, in which the family has been long
established; or they are new.

The new are either entirely new, as was Milan to Francesco Sforza, or
they are, as it were, members annexed to the hereditary state of the
prince who has acquired them, as was the kingdom of Naples to that of
the King of Spain.

Such dominions thus acquired are either accustomed to live under a
prince, or to live in freedom; and are acquired either by the arms of
the prince himself, or of others, or else by fortune or by ability.




CHAPTER II -- CONCERNING HEREDITARY PRINCIPALITIES

I will leave out all discussion on republics, inasmuch as in another
place I have written of them at length, and will address myself only to
principalities. In doing so I will keep to the order indicated above,
and discuss how such principalities are to be ruled and preserved.

I say at once there are fewer difficulties in holding hereditary states,
and those long accustomed to the family of their prince, than new
ones; for it is sufficient only not to transgress the customs of his
ancestors, and to deal prudently with circumstances as they arise, for a
prince of average powers to maintain himself in his state, unless he
be deprived of it by some extraordinary and excessive force; and if he
should be so deprived of it, whenever anything sinister happens to the
usurper, he will regain it.

We have in Italy, for example, the Duke of Ferrara, who could not have
withstood the attacks of the Venetians in '84, nor those of Pope Julius
in '10, unless he had been long established in his dominions. For the
hereditary prince has less cause and less necessity to offend; hence it
happens that he will be more loved; and unless extraordinary vices cause
him to be hated, it is reasonable to expect that his subjects will be
naturally well disposed towards him; and in the antiquity and duration
of his rule the memories and motives that make for change are lost, for
one change always leaves the toothing for another.




CHAPTER III -- CONCERNING MIXED PRINCIPALITIES

But the difficulties occur in a new principality. And firstly, if it be
not entirely new, but is, as it were, a member of a state which, taken
collectively, may be called composite, the changes arise chiefly from
an inherent difficulty which there is in all new principalities; for
men change their rulers willingly, hoping to better themselves, and this
hope induces them to take up arms against him who rules: wherein they
are deceived, because they afterwards find by experience they have
gone from bad to worse. This follows also on another natural and common
necessity, which always causes a new prince to burden those who have
submitted to him with his soldiery and with infinite other hardships
which he must put upon his new acquisition.

In this way you have enemies in all those whom you have injured in
seizing that principality, and you are not able to keep those friends
who put you there because of your not being able to satisfy them in the
way they expected, and you cannot take strong measures against them,
feeling bound to them. For, although one may be very strong in armed
forces, yet in entering a province one has always need of the goodwill
of the natives.

For these reasons Louis the Twelfth, King of France, quickly occupied
Milan, and as quickly lost it; and to turn him out the first time it
only needed Lodovico's own forces; because those who had opened the
gates to him, finding themselves deceived in their hopes of future
benefit, would not endure the ill-treatment of the new prince. It is
very true that, after acquiring rebellious provinces a second time,
they are not so lightly lost afterwards, because the prince, with
little reluctance, takes the opportunity of the rebellion to punish the
delinquents, to clear out the suspects, and to strengthen himself in the
weakest places. Thus to cause France to lose Milan the first time it was
enough for the Duke Lodovico(*) to raise insurrections on the borders;
but to cause him to lose it a second time it was necessary to bring
the whole world against him, and that his armies should be defeated and
driven out of Italy; which followed from the causes above mentioned.

     (*) Duke Lodovico was Lodovico Moro, a son of Francesco
     Sforza, who married Beatrice d'Este. He ruled over Milan
     from 1494 to 1500, and died in 1510.

Nevertheless Milan was taken from France both the first and the second
time. The general reasons for the first have been discussed; it remains
to name those for the second, and to see what resources he had, and what
any one in his situation would have had for maintaining himself more
securely in his acquisition than did the King of France.

Now I say that those dominions which, when acquired, are added to an
ancient state by him who acquires them, are either of the same country
and language, or they are not. When they are, it is easier to hold them,
especially when they have not been accustomed to self-government; and
to hold them securely it is enough to have destroyed the family of the
prince who was ruling them; because the two peoples, preserving in other
things the old conditions, and not being unlike in customs, will live
quietly together, as one has seen in Brittany, Burgundy, Gascony, and
Normandy, which have been bound to France for so long a time: and,
although there may be some difference in language, nevertheless the
customs are alike, and the people will easily be able to get on amongst
themselves. He who has annexed them, if he wishes to hold them, has only
to bear in mind two considerations: the one, that the family of their
former lord is extinguished; the other, that neither their laws nor
their taxes are altered, so that in a very short time they will become
entirely one body with the old principality.

But when states are acquired in a country differing in language,
customs, or laws, there are difficulties, and good fortune and great
energy are needed to hold them, and one of the greatest and most real
helps would be that he who has acquired them should go and reside there.
This would make his position more secure and durable, as it has made
that of the Turk in Greece, who, notwithstanding all the other measures
taken by him for holding that state, if he had not settled there, would
not have been able to keep it. Because, if one is on the spot, disorders
are seen as they spring up, and one can quickly remedy them; but if one
is not at hand, they are heard of only when they are great, and then one
can no longer remedy them. Besides this, the country is not pillaged
by your officials; the subjects are satisfied by prompt recourse to the
prince; thus, wishing to be good, they have more cause to love him, and
wishing to be otherwise, to fear him. He who would attack that state
from the outside must have the utmost caution; as long as the prince
resides there it can only be wrested from him with the greatest
difficulty.

The other and better course is to send colonies to one or two places,
which may be as keys to that state, for it is necessary either to do
this or else to keep there a great number of cavalry and infantry. A
prince does not spend much on colonies, for with little or no expense he
can send them out and keep them there, and he offends a minority only of
the citizens from whom he takes lands and houses to give them to the new
inhabitants; and those whom he offends, remaining poor and scattered,
are never able to injure him; whilst the rest being uninjured are easily
kept quiet, and at the same time are anxious not to err for fear it
should happen to them as it has to those who have been despoiled. In
conclusion, I say that these colonies are not costly, they are more
faithful, they injure less, and the injured, as has been said, being
poor and scattered, cannot hurt. Upon this, one has to remark that men
ought either to be well treated or crushed, because they can avenge
themselves of lighter injuries, of more serious ones they cannot;
therefore the injury that is to be done to a man ought to be of such a
kind that one does not stand in fear of revenge.

But in maintaining armed men there in place of colonies one spends much
more, having to consume on the garrison all the income from the
state, so that the acquisition turns into a loss, and many more are
exasperated, because the whole state is injured; through the shifting
of the garrison up and down all become acquainted with hardship, and
all become hostile, and they are enemies who, whilst beaten on their
own ground, are yet able to do hurt. For every reason, therefore, such
guards are as useless as a colony is useful.

Again, the prince who holds a country differing in the above respects
ought to make himself the head and defender of his less powerful
neighbours, and to weaken the more powerful amongst them, taking care
that no foreigner as powerful as himself shall, by any accident, get
a footing there; for it will always happen that such a one will be
introduced by those who are discontented, either through excess of
ambition or through fear, as one has seen already. The Romans were
brought into Greece by the Aetolians; and in every other country where
they obtained a footing they were brought in by the inhabitants. And the
usual course of affairs is that, as soon as a powerful foreigner enters
a country, all the subject states are drawn to him, moved by the hatred
which they feel against the ruling power. So that in respect to those
subject states he has not to take any trouble to gain them over to
himself, for the whole of them quickly rally to the state which he has
acquired there. He has only to take care that they do not get hold of
too much power and too much authority, and then with his own forces, and
with their goodwill, he can easily keep down the more powerful of them,
so as to remain entirely master in the country. And he who does not
properly manage this business will soon lose what he has acquired, and
whilst he does hold it he will have endless difficulties and troubles.

The Romans, in the countries which they annexed, observed closely these
measures; they sent colonies and maintained friendly relations with(*)
the minor powers, without increasing their strength; they kept down the
greater, and did not allow any strong foreign powers to gain authority.
Greece appears to me sufficient for an example. The Achaeans and
Aetolians were kept friendly by them, the kingdom of Macedonia was
humbled, Antiochus was driven out; yet the merits of the Achaeans and
Aetolians never secured for them permission to increase their power, nor
did the persuasions of Philip ever induce the Romans to be his friends
without first humbling him, nor did the influence of Antiochus make them
agree that he should retain any lordship over the country. Because the
Romans did in these instances what all prudent princes ought to do,
who have to regard not only present troubles, but also future ones, for
which they must prepare with every energy, because, when foreseen, it is
easy to remedy them; but if you wait until they approach, the medicine
is no longer in time because the malady has become incurable; for it
happens in this, as the physicians say it happens in hectic fever,
that in the beginning of the malady it is easy to cure but difficult to
detect, but in the course of time, not having been either detected or
treated in the beginning, it becomes easy to detect but difficult to
cure. Thus it happens in affairs of state, for when the evils that arise
have been foreseen (which it is only given to a wise man to see), they
can be quickly redressed, but when, through not having been foreseen,
they have been permitted to grow in a way that every one can see them,
there is no longer a remedy. Therefore, the Romans, foreseeing troubles,
dealt with them at once, and, even to avoid a war, would not let them
come to a head, for they knew that war is not to be avoided, but is only
to be put off to the advantage of others; moreover they wished to fight
with Philip and Antiochus in Greece so as not to have to do it in Italy;
they could have avoided both, but this they did not wish; nor did that
ever please them which is forever in the mouths of the wise ones of our
time:--Let us enjoy the benefits of the time--but rather the benefits of
their own valour and prudence, for time drives everything before it, and
is able to bring with it good as well as evil, and evil as well as good.

     (*) See remark in the introduction on the word
     "intrattenere."

But let us turn to France and inquire whether she has done any of the
things mentioned. I will speak of Louis(*) (and not of Charles)(+) as
the one whose conduct is the better to be observed, he having held
possession of Italy for the longest period; and you will see that he
has done the opposite to those things which ought to be done to retain a
state composed of divers elements.

     (*) Louis XII, King of France, "The Father of the People,"
     born 1462, died 1515.

     (+) Charles VIII, King of France, born 1470, died 1498.

King Louis was brought into Italy by the ambition of the Venetians, who
desired to obtain half the state of Lombardy by his intervention. I
will not blame the course taken by the king, because, wishing to get a
foothold in Italy, and having no friends there--seeing rather that every
door was shut to him owing to the conduct of Charles--he was forced to
accept those friendships which he could get, and he would have succeeded
very quickly in his design if in other matters he had not made some
mistakes. The king, however, having acquired Lombardy, regained at once
the authority which Charles had lost: Genoa yielded; the Florentines
became his friends; the Marquess of Mantua, the Duke of Ferrara, the
Bentivogli, my lady of Forli, the Lords of Faenza, of Pesaro, of
Rimini, of Camerino, of Piombino, the Lucchese, the Pisans, the
Sienese--everybody made advances to him to become his friend. Then could
the Venetians realize the rashness of the course taken by them, which,
in order that they might secure two towns in Lombardy, had made the king
master of two-thirds of Italy.

Let any one now consider with what little difficulty the king could have
maintained his position in Italy had he observed the rules above laid
down, and kept all his friends secure and protected; for although they
were numerous they were both weak and timid, some afraid of the Church,
some of the Venetians, and thus they would always have been forced to
stand in with him, and by their means he could easily have made himself
secure against those who remained powerful. But he was no sooner in
Milan than he did the contrary by assisting Pope Alexander to occupy the
Romagna. It never occurred to him that by this action he was weakening
himself, depriving himself of friends and of those who had thrown
themselves into his lap, whilst he aggrandized the Church by adding much
temporal power to the spiritual, thus giving it greater authority. And
having committed this prime error, he was obliged to follow it up, so
much so that, to put an end to the ambition of Alexander, and to prevent
his becoming the master of Tuscany, he was himself forced to come into
Italy.

And as if it were not enough to have aggrandized the Church, and
deprived himself of friends, he, wishing to have the kingdom of Naples,
divided it with the King of Spain, and where he was the prime arbiter in
Italy he takes an associate, so that the ambitious of that country and
the malcontents of his own should have somewhere to shelter; and whereas
he could have left in the kingdom his own pensioner as king, he drove
him out, to put one there who was able to drive him, Louis, out in turn.

The wish to acquire is in truth very natural and common, and men always
do so when they can, and for this they will be praised not blamed; but
when they cannot do so, yet wish to do so by any means, then there is
folly and blame. Therefore, if France could have attacked Naples with
her own forces she ought to have done so; if she could not, then she
ought not to have divided it. And if the partition which she made with
the Venetians in Lombardy was justified by the excuse that by it she got
a foothold in Italy, this other partition merited blame, for it had not
the excuse of that necessity.

Therefore Louis made these five errors: he destroyed the minor powers,
he increased the strength of one of the greater powers in Italy, he
brought in a foreign power, he did not settle in the country, he did not
send colonies. Which errors, had he lived, were not enough to injure
him had he not made a sixth by taking away their dominions from the
Venetians; because, had he not aggrandized the Church, nor brought Spain
into Italy, it would have been very reasonable and necessary to humble
them; but having first taken these steps, he ought never to have
consented to their ruin, for they, being powerful, would always have
kept off others from designs on Lombardy, to which the Venetians would
never have consented except to become masters themselves there; also
because the others would not wish to take Lombardy from France in order
to give it to the Venetians, and to run counter to both they would not
have had the courage.

And if any one should say: "King Louis yielded the Romagna to Alexander
and the kingdom to Spain to avoid war," I answer for the reasons given
above that a blunder ought never to be perpetrated to avoid war, because
it is not to be avoided, but is only deferred to your disadvantage. And
if another should allege the pledge which the king had given to the
Pope that he would assist him in the enterprise, in exchange for the
dissolution of his marriage(*) and for the cap to Rouen,(+) to that I
reply what I shall write later on concerning the faith of princes, and
how it ought to be kept.

     (*) Louis XII divorced his wife, Jeanne, daughter of Louis
     XI, and married in 1499 Anne of Brittany, widow of Charles
     VIII, in order to retain the Duchy of Brittany for the
     crown.

     (+) The Archbishop of Rouen. He was Georges d'Amboise,
     created a cardinal by Alexander VI. Born 1460, died 1510.

Thus King Louis lost Lombardy by not having followed any of the
conditions observed by those who have taken possession of countries and
wished to retain them. Nor is there any miracle in this, but much that
is reasonable and quite natural. And on these matters I spoke at Nantes
with Rouen, when Valentino, as Cesare Borgia, the son of Pope Alexander,
was usually called, occupied the Romagna, and on Cardinal Rouen
observing to me that the Italians did not understand war, I replied
to him that the French did not understand statecraft, meaning that
otherwise they would not have allowed the Church to reach such
greatness. And in fact it has been seen that the greatness of the Church
and of Spain in Italy has been caused by France, and her ruin may be
attributed to them. From this a general rule is drawn which never or
rarely fails: that he who is the cause of another becoming powerful
is ruined; because that predominancy has been brought about either by
astuteness or else by force, and both are distrusted by him who has been
raised to power.




CHAPTER IV -- WHY THE KINGDOM OF DARIUS, CONQUERED BY ALEXANDER, DID NOT
REBEL AGAINST THE SUCCESSORS OF ALEXANDER AT HIS DEATH

Considering the difficulties which men have had to hold to a newly
acquired state, some might wonder how, seeing that Alexander the
Great became the master of Asia in a few years, and died whilst it
was scarcely settled (whence it might appear reasonable that the whole
empire would have rebelled), nevertheless his successors maintained
themselves, and had to meet no other difficulty than that which arose
among themselves from their own ambitions.

I answer that the principalities of which one has record are found to
be governed in two different ways; either by a prince, with a body
of servants, who assist him to govern the kingdom as ministers by his
favour and permission; or by a prince and barons, who hold that dignity
by antiquity of blood and not by the grace of the prince. Such barons
have states and their own subjects, who recognize them as lords and hold
them in natural affection. Those states that are governed by a prince
and his servants hold their prince in more consideration, because in all
the country there is no one who is recognized as superior to him, and
if they yield obedience to another they do it as to a minister and
official, and they do not bear him any particular affection.

The examples of these two governments in our time are the Turk and the
King of France. The entire monarchy of the Turk is governed by one lord,
the others are his servants; and, dividing his kingdom into sanjaks, he
sends there different administrators, and shifts and changes them as
he chooses. But the King of France is placed in the midst of an ancient
body of lords, acknowledged by their own subjects, and beloved by them;
they have their own prerogatives, nor can the king take these away
except at his peril. Therefore, he who considers both of these states
will recognize great difficulties in seizing the state of the Turk,
but, once it is conquered, great ease in holding it. The causes of the
difficulties in seizing the kingdom of the Turk are that the usurper
cannot be called in by the princes of the kingdom, nor can he hope to be
assisted in his designs by the revolt of those whom the lord has around
him. This arises from the reasons given above; for his ministers, being
all slaves and bondmen, can only be corrupted with great difficulty, and
one can expect little advantage from them when they have been corrupted,
as they cannot carry the people with them, for the reasons assigned.
Hence, he who attacks the Turk must bear in mind that he will find him
united, and he will have to rely more on his own strength than on the
revolt of others; but, if once the Turk has been conquered, and routed
in the field in such a way that he cannot replace his armies, there
is nothing to fear but the family of this prince, and, this being
exterminated, there remains no one to fear, the others having no credit
with the people; and as the conqueror did not rely on them before his
victory, so he ought not to fear them after it.

The contrary happens in kingdoms governed like that of France, because
one can easily enter there by gaining over some baron of the kingdom,
for one always finds malcontents and such as desire a change. Such men,
for the reasons given, can open the way into the state and render the
victory easy; but if you wish to hold it afterwards, you meet with
infinite difficulties, both from those who have assisted you and from
those you have crushed. Nor is it enough for you to have exterminated
the family of the prince, because the lords that remain make themselves
the heads of fresh movements against you, and as you are unable either
to satisfy or exterminate them, that state is lost whenever time brings
the opportunity.

Now if you will consider what was the nature of the government of
Darius, you will find it similar to the kingdom of the Turk, and
therefore it was only necessary for Alexander, first to overthrow him in
the field, and then to take the country from him. After which victory,
Darius being killed, the state remained secure to Alexander, for the
above reasons. And if his successors had been united they would have
enjoyed it securely and at their ease, for there were no tumults raised
in the kingdom except those they provoked themselves.

But it is impossible to hold with such tranquillity states constituted
like that of France. Hence arose those frequent rebellions against the
Romans in Spain, France, and Greece, owing to the many principalities
there were in these states, of which, as long as the memory of them
endured, the Romans always held an insecure possession; but with the
power and long continuance of the empire the memory of them passed
away, and the Romans then became secure possessors. And when fighting
afterwards amongst themselves, each one was able to attach to himself
his own parts of the country, according to the authority he had assumed
there; and the family of the former lord being exterminated, none other
than the Romans were acknowledged.

When these things are remembered no one will marvel at the ease with
which Alexander held the Empire of Asia, or at the difficulties which
others have had to keep an acquisition, such as Pyrrhus and many more;
this is not occasioned by the little or abundance of ability in the
conqueror, but by the want of uniformity in the subject state.




CHAPTER V -- CONCERNING THE WAY TO GOVERN CITIES OR PRINCIPALITIES WHICH
LIVED UNDER THEIR OWN LAWS BEFORE THEY WERE ANNEXED

Whenever those states which have been acquired as stated have been
accustomed to live under their own laws and in freedom, there are three
courses for those who wish to hold them: the first is to ruin them, the
next is to reside there in person, the third is to permit them to live
under their own laws, drawing a tribute, and establishing within it an
oligarchy which will keep it friendly to you. Because such a government,
being created by the prince, knows that it cannot stand without
his friendship and interest, and does it utmost to support him; and
therefore he who would keep a city accustomed to freedom will hold it
more easily by the means of its own citizens than in any other way.

There are, for example, the Spartans and the Romans. The Spartans held
Athens and Thebes, establishing there an oligarchy; nevertheless they
lost them. The Romans, in order to hold Capua, Carthage, and Numantia,
dismantled them, and did not lose them. They wished to hold Greece as
the Spartans held it, making it free and permitting its laws, and did
not succeed. So to hold it they were compelled to dismantle many
cities in the country, for in truth there is no safe way to retain them
otherwise than by ruining them. And he who becomes master of a city
accustomed to freedom and does not destroy it, may expect to be
destroyed by it, for in rebellion it has always the watchword of liberty
and its ancient privileges as a rallying point, which neither time
nor benefits will ever cause it to forget. And whatever you may do or
provide against, they never forget that name or their privileges unless
they are disunited or dispersed, but at every chance they immediately
rally to them, as Pisa after the hundred years she had been held in
bondage by the Florentines.

But when cities or countries are accustomed to live under a prince, and
his family is exterminated, they, being on the one hand accustomed to
obey and on the other hand not having the old prince, cannot agree in
making one from amongst themselves, and they do not know how to govern
themselves. For this reason they are very slow to take up arms, and a
prince can gain them to himself and secure them much more easily. But
in republics there is more vitality, greater hatred, and more desire
for vengeance, which will never permit them to allow the memory of their
former liberty to rest; so that the safest way is to destroy them or to
reside there.




CHAPTER VI -- CONCERNING NEW PRINCIPALITIES WHICH ARE ACQUIRED BY ONE'S
OWN ARMS AND ABILITY

Let no one be surprised if, in speaking of entirely new principalities
as I shall do, I adduce the highest examples both of prince and of
state; because men, walking almost always in paths beaten by others, and
following by imitation their deeds, are yet unable to keep entirely to
the ways of others or attain to the power of those they imitate. A wise
man ought always to follow the paths beaten by great men, and to imitate
those who have been supreme, so that if his ability does not equal
theirs, at least it will savour of it. Let him act like the clever
archers who, designing to hit the mark which yet appears too far
distant, and knowing the limits to which the strength of their bow
attains, take aim much higher than the mark, not to reach by their
strength or arrow to so great a height, but to be able with the aid of
so high an aim to hit the mark they wish to reach.

I say, therefore, that in entirely new principalities, where there is
a new prince, more or less difficulty is found in keeping them,
accordingly as there is more or less ability in him who has acquired
the state. Now, as the fact of becoming a prince from a private station
presupposes either ability or fortune, it is clear that one or other
of these things will mitigate in some degree many difficulties.
Nevertheless, he who has relied least on fortune is established the
strongest. Further, it facilitates matters when the prince, having no
other state, is compelled to reside there in person.

But to come to those who, by their own ability and not through fortune,
have risen to be princes, I say that Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus,
and such like are the most excellent examples. And although one may not
discuss Moses, he having been a mere executor of the will of God, yet
he ought to be admired, if only for that favour which made him worthy to
speak with God. But in considering Cyrus and others who have acquired or
founded kingdoms, all will be found admirable; and if their particular
deeds and conduct shall be considered, they will not be found inferior
to those of Moses, although he had so great a preceptor. And in
examining their actions and lives one cannot see that they owed anything
to fortune beyond opportunity, which brought them the material to mould
into the form which seemed best to them. Without that opportunity their
powers of mind would have been extinguished, and without those powers
the opportunity would have come in vain.

It was necessary, therefore, to Moses that he should find the people of
Israel in Egypt enslaved and oppressed by the Egyptians, in order that
they should be disposed to follow him so as to be delivered out of
bondage. It was necessary that Romulus should not remain in Alba, and
that he should be abandoned at his birth, in order that he should become
King of Rome and founder of the fatherland. It was necessary that Cyrus
should find the Persians discontented with the government of the Medes,
and the Medes soft and effeminate through their long peace. Theseus
could not have shown his ability had he not found the Athenians
dispersed. These opportunities, therefore, made those men fortunate,
and their high ability enabled them to recognize the opportunity whereby
their country was ennobled and made famous.

Those who by valorous ways become princes, like these men, acquire
a principality with difficulty, but they keep it with ease. The
difficulties they have in acquiring it rise in part from the new rules
and methods which they are forced to introduce to establish their
government and its security. And it ought to be remembered that there
is nothing more difficult to take in hand, more perilous to conduct, or
more uncertain in its success, than to take the lead in the introduction
of a new order of things, because the innovator has for enemies
all those who have done well under the old conditions, and lukewarm
defenders in those who may do well under the new. This coolness arises
partly from fear of the opponents, who have the laws on their side, and
partly from the incredulity of men, who do not readily believe in new
things until they have had a long experience of them. Thus it happens
that whenever those who are hostile have the opportunity to attack they
do it like partisans, whilst the others defend lukewarmly, in such wise
that the prince is endangered along with them.

It is necessary, therefore, if we desire to discuss this matter
thoroughly, to inquire whether these innovators can rely on themselves
or have to depend on others: that is to say, whether, to consummate
their enterprise, have they to use prayers or can they use force? In the
first instance they always succeed badly, and never compass anything;
but when they can rely on themselves and use force, then they are rarely
endangered. Hence it is that all armed prophets have conquered, and the
unarmed ones have been destroyed. Besides the reasons mentioned, the
nature of the people is variable, and whilst it is easy to persuade
them, it is difficult to fix them in that persuasion. And thus it is
necessary to take such measures that, when they believe no longer, it
may be possible to make them believe by force.

If Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus had been unarmed they could not
have enforced their constitutions for long--as happened in our time to
Fra Girolamo Savonarola, who was ruined with his new order of things
immediately the multitude believed in him no longer, and he had no means
of keeping steadfast those who believed or of making the unbelievers to
believe. Therefore such as these have great difficulties in consummating
their enterprise, for all their dangers are in the ascent, yet with
ability they will overcome them; but when these are overcome, and those
who envied them their success are exterminated, they will begin to be
respected, and they will continue afterwards powerful, secure, honoured,
and happy.

To these great examples I wish to add a lesser one; still it bears some
resemblance to them, and I wish it to suffice me for all of a like kind:
it is Hiero the Syracusan.(*) This man rose from a private station to
be Prince of Syracuse, nor did he, either, owe anything to fortune but
opportunity; for the Syracusans, being oppressed, chose him for their
captain, afterwards he was rewarded by being made their prince. He was
of so great ability, even as a private citizen, that one who writes
of him says he wanted nothing but a kingdom to be a king. This man
abolished the old soldiery, organized the new, gave up old alliances,
made new ones; and as he had his own soldiers and allies, on such
foundations he was able to build any edifice: thus, whilst he had
endured much trouble in acquiring, he had but little in keeping.

     (*) Hiero II, born about 307 B.C., died 216 B.C.




CHAPTER VII -- CONCERNING NEW PRINCIPALITIES WHICH ARE ACQUIRED EITHER
BY THE ARMS OF OTHERS OR BY GOOD FORTUNE

Those who solely by good fortune become princes from being private
citizens have little trouble in rising, but much in keeping atop; they
have not any difficulties on the way up, because they fly, but they have
many when they reach the summit. Such are those to whom some state
is given either for money or by the favour of him who bestows it;
as happened to many in Greece, in the cities of Ionia and of the
Hellespont, where princes were made by Darius, in order that they might
hold the cities both for his security and his glory; as also were those
emperors who, by the corruption of the soldiers, from being citizens
came to empire. Such stand simply elevated upon the goodwill and the
fortune of him who has elevated them--two most inconstant and unstable
things. Neither have they the knowledge requisite for the position;
because, unless they are men of great worth and ability, it is not
reasonable to expect that they should know how to command, having always
lived in a private condition; besides, they cannot hold it because they
have not forces which they can keep friendly and faithful.

States that rise unexpectedly, then, like all other things in nature
which are born and grow rapidly, cannot leave their foundations and
correspondencies(*) fixed in such a way that the first storm will
not overthrow them; unless, as is said, those who unexpectedly become
princes are men of so much ability that they know they have to be
prepared at once to hold that which fortune has thrown into their laps,
and that those foundations, which others have laid BEFORE they became
princes, they must lay AFTERWARDS.

     (*) "Le radici e corrispondenze," their roots (i.e.
     foundations) and correspondencies or relations with other
     states--a common meaning of "correspondence" and
     "correspondency" in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.

Concerning these two methods of rising to be a prince by ability or
fortune, I wish to adduce two examples within our own recollection, and
these are Francesco Sforza(*) and Cesare Borgia. Francesco, by proper
means and with great ability, from being a private person rose to be
Duke of Milan, and that which he had acquired with a thousand anxieties
he kept with little trouble. On the other hand, Cesare Borgia, called by
the people Duke Valentino, acquired his state during the ascendancy of
his father, and on its decline he lost it, notwithstanding that he had
taken every measure and done all that ought to be done by a wise and
able man to fix firmly his roots in the states which the arms and
fortunes of others had bestowed on him.

     (*) Francesco Sforza, born 1401, died 1466. He married
     Bianca Maria Visconti, a natural daughter of Filippo
     Visconti, the Duke of Milan, on whose death he procured his
     own elevation to the duchy. Machiavelli was the accredited
     agent of the Florentine Republic to Cesare Borgia (1478-
     1507) during the transactions which led up to the
     assassinations of the Orsini and Vitelli at Sinigalia, and
     along with his letters to his chiefs in Florence he has left
     an account, written ten years before "The Prince," of the
     proceedings of the duke in his "Descritione del modo tenuto
     dal duca Valentino nello ammazzare Vitellozzo Vitelli,"
     etc., a translation of which is appended to the present
     work.

Because, as is stated above, he who has not first laid his foundations
may be able with great ability to lay them afterwards, but they will
be laid with trouble to the architect and danger to the building. If,
therefore, all the steps taken by the duke be considered, it will be
seen that he laid solid foundations for his future power, and I do not
consider it superfluous to discuss them, because I do not know what
better precepts to give a new prince than the example of his actions;
and if his dispositions were of no avail, that was not his fault, but
the extraordinary and extreme malignity of fortune.

Alexander the Sixth, in wishing to aggrandize the duke, his son, had
many immediate and prospective difficulties. Firstly, he did not see his
way to make him master of any state that was not a state of the Church;
and if he was willing to rob the Church he knew that the Duke of Milan
and the Venetians would not consent, because Faenza and Rimini were
already under the protection of the Venetians. Besides this, he saw the
arms of Italy, especially those by which he might have been assisted, in
hands that would fear the aggrandizement of the Pope, namely, the Orsini
and the Colonnesi and their following. It behoved him, therefore,
to upset this state of affairs and embroil the powers, so as to make
himself securely master of part of their states. This was easy for him
to do, because he found the Venetians, moved by other reasons, inclined
to bring back the French into Italy; he would not only not oppose this,
but he would render it more easy by dissolving the former marriage of
King Louis. Therefore the king came into Italy with the assistance of
the Venetians and the consent of Alexander. He was no sooner in Milan
than the Pope had soldiers from him for the attempt on the Romagna,
which yielded to him on the reputation of the king. The duke, therefore,
having acquired the Romagna and beaten the Colonnesi, while wishing to
hold that and to advance further, was hindered by two things: the one,
his forces did not appear loyal to him, the other, the goodwill of
France: that is to say, he feared that the forces of the Orsini, which
he was using, would not stand to him, that not only might they hinder
him from winning more, but might themselves seize what he had won, and
that the king might also do the same. Of the Orsini he had a warning
when, after taking Faenza and attacking Bologna, he saw them go very
unwillingly to that attack. And as to the king, he learned his mind when
he himself, after taking the Duchy of Urbino, attacked Tuscany, and the
king made him desist from that undertaking; hence the duke decided to
depend no more upon the arms and the luck of others.

For the first thing he weakened the Orsini and Colonnesi parties in
Rome, by gaining to himself all their adherents who were gentlemen,
making them his gentlemen, giving them good pay, and, according to their
rank, honouring them with office and command in such a way that in a few
months all attachment to the factions was destroyed and turned entirely
to the duke. After this he awaited an opportunity to crush the Orsini,
having scattered the adherents of the Colonna house. This came to him
soon and he used it well; for the Orsini, perceiving at length that the
aggrandizement of the duke and the Church was ruin to them, called a
meeting of the Magione in Perugia. From this sprung the rebellion at
Urbino and the tumults in the Romagna, with endless dangers to the duke,
all of which he overcame with the help of the French. Having restored
his authority, not to leave it at risk by trusting either to the French
or other outside forces, he had recourse to his wiles, and he knew
so well how to conceal his mind that, by the mediation of Signor
Pagolo--whom the duke did not fail to secure with all kinds of
attention, giving him money, apparel, and horses--the Orsini were
reconciled, so that their simplicity brought them into his power
at Sinigalia.(*) Having exterminated the leaders, and turned their
partisans into his friends, the duke laid sufficiently good foundations
to his power, having all the Romagna and the Duchy of Urbino; and the
people now beginning to appreciate their prosperity, he gained them
all over to himself. And as this point is worthy of notice, and to be
imitated by others, I am not willing to leave it out.

     (*) Sinigalia, 31st December 1502.

When the duke occupied the Romagna he found it under the rule of weak
masters, who rather plundered their subjects than ruled them, and gave
them more cause for disunion than for union, so that the country was
full of robbery, quarrels, and every kind of violence; and so, wishing
to bring back peace and obedience to authority, he considered it
necessary to give it a good governor. Thereupon he promoted Messer
Ramiro d'Orco,(*) a swift and cruel man, to whom he gave the fullest
power. This man in a short time restored peace and unity with the
greatest success. Afterwards the duke considered that it was not
advisable to confer such excessive authority, for he had no doubt but
that he would become odious, so he set up a court of judgment in the
country, under a most excellent president, wherein all cities had their
advocates. And because he knew that the past severity had caused some
hatred against himself, so, to clear himself in the minds of the people,
and gain them entirely to himself, he desired to show that, if any
cruelty had been practised, it had not originated with him, but in the
natural sternness of the minister. Under this pretence he took Ramiro,
and one morning caused him to be executed and left on the piazza at
Cesena with the block and a bloody knife at his side. The barbarity of
this spectacle caused the people to be at once satisfied and dismayed.

     (*) Ramiro d'Orco. Ramiro de Lorqua.

But let us return whence we started. I say that the duke, finding
himself now sufficiently powerful and partly secured from immediate
dangers by having armed himself in his own way, and having in a great
measure crushed those forces in his vicinity that could injure him if he
wished to proceed with his conquest, had next to consider France, for
he knew that the king, who too late was aware of his mistake, would not
support him. And from this time he began to seek new alliances and to
temporize with France in the expedition which she was making towards the
kingdom of Naples against the Spaniards who were besieging Gaeta. It
was his intention to secure himself against them, and this he would have
quickly accomplished had Alexander lived.

Such was his line of action as to present affairs. But as to the future
he had to fear, in the first place, that a new successor to the Church
might not be friendly to him and might seek to take from him that which
Alexander had given him, so he decided to act in four ways. Firstly, by
exterminating the families of those lords whom he had despoiled, so as
to take away that pretext from the Pope. Secondly, by winning to himself
all the gentlemen of Rome, so as to be able to curb the Pope with their
aid, as has been observed. Thirdly, by converting the college more to
himself. Fourthly, by acquiring so much power before the Pope should die
that he could by his own measures resist the first shock. Of these four
things, at the death of Alexander, he had accomplished three. For he had
killed as many of the dispossessed lords as he could lay hands on, and
few had escaped; he had won over the Roman gentlemen, and he had the
most numerous party in the college. And as to any fresh acquisition, he
intended to become master of Tuscany, for he already possessed Perugia
and Piombino, and Pisa was under his protection. And as he had no longer
to study France (for the French were already driven out of the kingdom
of Naples by the Spaniards, and in this way both were compelled to buy
his goodwill), he pounced down upon Pisa. After this, Lucca and Siena
yielded at once, partly through hatred and partly through fear of
the Florentines; and the Florentines would have had no remedy had he
continued to prosper, as he was prospering the year that Alexander died,
for he had acquired so much power and reputation that he would have
stood by himself, and no longer have depended on the luck and the forces
of others, but solely on his own power and ability.

But Alexander died five years after he had first drawn the sword. He
left the duke with the state of Romagna alone consolidated, with the
rest in the air, between two most powerful hostile armies, and sick unto
death. Yet there were in the duke such boldness and ability, and he knew
so well how men are to be won or lost, and so firm were the foundations
which in so short a time he had laid, that if he had not had those
armies on his back, or if he had been in good health, he would have
overcome all difficulties. And it is seen that his foundations were
good, for the Romagna awaited him for more than a month. In Rome,
although but half alive, he remained secure; and whilst the Baglioni,
the Vitelli, and the Orsini might come to Rome, they could not effect
anything against him. If he could not have made Pope him whom he wished,
at least the one whom he did not wish would not have been elected. But
if he had been in sound health at the death of Alexander,(*) everything
would have been different to him. On the day that Julius the Second(+)
was elected, he told me that he had thought of everything that might
occur at the death of his father, and had provided a remedy for all,
except that he had never anticipated that, when the death did happen, he
himself would be on the point to die.

     (*) Alexander VI died of fever, 18th August 1503.

     (+) Julius II was Giuliano della Rovere, Cardinal of San
     Pietro ad Vincula, born 1443, died 1513.

When all the actions of the duke are recalled, I do not know how to
blame him, but rather it appears to be, as I have said, that I ought to
offer him for imitation to all those who, by the fortune or the arms of
others, are raised to government. Because he, having a lofty spirit and
far-reaching aims, could not have regulated his conduct otherwise,
and only the shortness of the life of Alexander and his own sickness
frustrated his designs. Therefore, he who considers it necessary to
secure himself in his new principality, to win friends, to overcome
either by force or fraud, to make himself beloved and feared by the
people, to be followed and revered by the soldiers, to exterminate those
who have power or reason to hurt him, to change the old order of things
for new, to be severe and gracious, magnanimous and liberal, to destroy
a disloyal soldiery and to create new, to maintain friendship with kings
and princes in such a way that they must help him with zeal and offend
with caution, cannot find a more lively example than the actions of this
man.

Only can he be blamed for the election of Julius the Second, in whom he
made a bad choice, because, as is said, not being able to elect a Pope
to his own mind, he could have hindered any other from being elected
Pope; and he ought never to have consented to the election of any
cardinal whom he had injured or who had cause to fear him if they became
pontiffs. For men injure either from fear or hatred. Those whom he
had injured, amongst others, were San Pietro ad Vincula, Colonna, San
Giorgio, and Ascanio.(*) The rest, in becoming Pope, had to fear him,
Rouen and the Spaniards excepted; the latter from their relationship and
obligations, the former from his influence, the kingdom of France having
relations with him. Therefore, above everything, the duke ought to have
created a Spaniard Pope, and, failing him, he ought to have consented to
Rouen and not San Pietro ad Vincula. He who believes that new benefits
will cause great personages to forget old injuries is deceived.
Therefore, the duke erred in his choice, and it was the cause of his
ultimate ruin.

     (*) San Giorgio is Raffaello Riario. Ascanio is Ascanio
     Sforza.




CHAPTER VIII -- CONCERNING THOSE WHO HAVE OBTAINED A PRINCIPALITY BY
WICKEDNESS

Although a prince may rise from a private station in two ways, neither
of which can be entirely attributed to fortune or genius, yet it is
manifest to me that I must not be silent on them, although one could be
more copiously treated when I discuss republics. These methods are
when, either by some wicked or nefarious ways, one ascends to the
principality, or when by the favour of his fellow-citizens a private
person becomes the prince of his country. And speaking of the first
method, it will be illustrated by two examples--one ancient, the other
modern--and without entering further into the subject, I consider these
two examples will suffice those who may be compelled to follow them.

Agathocles, the Sicilian,(*) became King of Syracuse not only from
a private but from a low and abject position. This man, the son of a
potter, through all the changes in his fortunes always led an infamous
life. Nevertheless, he accompanied his infamies with so much ability of
mind and body that, having devoted himself to the military profession,
he rose through its ranks to be Praetor of Syracuse. Being established
in that position, and having deliberately resolved to make himself
prince and to seize by violence, without obligation to others, that
which had been conceded to him by assent, he came to an understanding
for this purpose with Amilcar, the Carthaginian, who, with his army, was
fighting in Sicily. One morning he assembled the people and the senate
of Syracuse, as if he had to discuss with them things relating to the
Republic, and at a given signal the soldiers killed all the senators and
the richest of the people; these dead, he seized and held the princedom
of that city without any civil commotion. And although he was twice
routed by the Carthaginians, and ultimately besieged, yet not only was
he able to defend his city, but leaving part of his men for its defence,
with the others he attacked Africa, and in a short time raised the
siege of Syracuse. The Carthaginians, reduced to extreme necessity, were
compelled to come to terms with Agathocles, and, leaving Sicily to him,
had to be content with the possession of Africa.

     (*) Agathocles the Sicilian, born 361 B.C., died 289 B.C.

Therefore, he who considers the actions and the genius of this man will
see nothing, or little, which can be attributed to fortune, inasmuch as
he attained pre-eminence, as is shown above, not by the favour of any
one, but step by step in the military profession, which steps were
gained with a thousand troubles and perils, and were afterwards boldly
held by him with many hazardous dangers. Yet it cannot be called talent
to slay fellow-citizens, to deceive friends, to be without faith,
without mercy, without religion; such methods may gain empire, but
not glory. Still, if the courage of Agathocles in entering into and
extricating himself from dangers be considered, together with his
greatness of mind in enduring and overcoming hardships, it cannot be
seen why he should be esteemed less than the most notable captain.
Nevertheless, his barbarous cruelty and inhumanity with infinite
wickedness do not permit him to be celebrated among the most excellent
men. What he achieved cannot be attributed either to fortune or genius.

In our times, during the rule of Alexander the Sixth, Oliverotto da
Fermo, having been left an orphan many years before, was brought up
by his maternal uncle, Giovanni Fogliani, and in the early days of his
youth sent to fight under Pagolo Vitelli, that, being trained under
his discipline, he might attain some high position in the military
profession. After Pagolo died, he fought under his brother Vitellozzo,
and in a very short time, being endowed with wit and a vigorous body
and mind, he became the first man in his profession. But it appearing
a paltry thing to serve under others, he resolved, with the aid of some
citizens of Fermo, to whom the slavery of their country was dearer than
its liberty, and with the help of the Vitelleschi, to seize Fermo. So
he wrote to Giovanni Fogliani that, having been away from home for many
years, he wished to visit him and his city, and in some measure to look
upon his patrimony; and although he had not laboured to acquire anything
except honour, yet, in order that the citizens should see he had not
spent his time in vain, he desired to come honourably, so would be
accompanied by one hundred horsemen, his friends and retainers; and he
entreated Giovanni to arrange that he should be received honourably by
the Fermians, all of which would be not only to his honour, but also to
that of Giovanni himself, who had brought him up.

Giovanni, therefore, did not fail in any attentions due to his nephew,
and he caused him to be honourably received by the Fermians, and he
lodged him in his own house, where, having passed some days, and having
arranged what was necessary for his wicked designs, Oliverotto gave a
solemn banquet to which he invited Giovanni Fogliani and the chiefs of
Fermo. When the viands and all the other entertainments that are usual
in such banquets were finished, Oliverotto artfully began certain grave
discourses, speaking of the greatness of Pope Alexander and his son
Cesare, and of their enterprises, to which discourse Giovanni and others
answered; but he rose at once, saying that such matters ought to be
discussed in a more private place, and he betook himself to a chamber,
whither Giovanni and the rest of the citizens went in after him. No
sooner were they seated than soldiers issued from secret places and
slaughtered Giovanni and the rest. After these murders Oliverotto,
mounted on horseback, rode up and down the town and besieged the chief
magistrate in the palace, so that in fear the people were forced to obey
him, and to form a government, of which he made himself the prince. He
killed all the malcontents who were able to injure him, and strengthened
himself with new civil and military ordinances, in such a way that, in
the year during which he held the principality, not only was he
secure in the city of Fermo, but he had become formidable to all his
neighbours. And his destruction would have been as difficult as that
of Agathocles if he had not allowed himself to be overreached by Cesare
Borgia, who took him with the Orsini and Vitelli at Sinigalia, as was
stated above. Thus one year after he had committed this parricide, he
was strangled, together with Vitellozzo, whom he had made his leader in
valour and wickedness.

Some may wonder how it can happen that Agathocles, and his like, after
infinite treacheries and cruelties, should live for long secure in
his country, and defend himself from external enemies, and never be
conspired against by his own citizens; seeing that many others, by means
of cruelty, have never been able even in peaceful times to hold the
state, still less in the doubtful times of war. I believe that this
follows from severities(*) being badly or properly used. Those may be
called properly used, if of evil it is possible to speak well, that are
applied at one blow and are necessary to one's security, and that are
not persisted in afterwards unless they can be turned to the advantage
of the subjects. The badly employed are those which, notwithstanding
they may be few in the commencement, multiply with time rather than
decrease. Those who practise the first system are able, by aid of God
or man, to mitigate in some degree their rule, as Agathocles did. It is
impossible for those who follow the other to maintain themselves.

     (*) Mr Burd suggests that this word probably comes near the
     modern equivalent of Machiavelli's thought when he speaks of
     "crudelta" than the more obvious "cruelties."

Hence it is to be remarked that, in seizing a state, the usurper ought
to examine closely into all those injuries which it is necessary for him
to inflict, and to do them all at one stroke so as not to have to repeat
them daily; and thus by not unsettling men he will be able to reassure
them, and win them to himself by benefits. He who does otherwise, either
from timidity or evil advice, is always compelled to keep the knife
in his hand; neither can he rely on his subjects, nor can they attach
themselves to him, owing to their continued and repeated wrongs. For
injuries ought to be done all at one time, so that, being tasted less,
they offend less; benefits ought to be given little by little, so that
the flavour of them may last longer.

And above all things, a prince ought to live amongst his people in such
a way that no unexpected circumstances, whether of good or evil, shall
make him change; because if the necessity for this comes in troubled
times, you are too late for harsh measures; and mild ones will not help
you, for they will be considered as forced from you, and no one will be
under any obligation to you for them.




CHAPTER IX -- CONCERNING A CIVIL PRINCIPALITY

But coming to the other point--where a leading citizen becomes the
prince of his country, not by wickedness or any intolerable violence,
but by the favour of his fellow citizens--this may be called a civil
principality: nor is genius or fortune altogether necessary to attain to
it, but rather a happy shrewdness. I say then that such a principality
is obtained either by the favour of the people or by the favour of the
nobles. Because in all cities these two distinct parties are found,
and from this it arises that the people do not wish to be ruled nor
oppressed by the nobles, and the nobles wish to rule and oppress the
people; and from these two opposite desires there arises in cities one
of three results, either a principality, self-government, or anarchy.

A principality is created either by the people or by the nobles,
accordingly as one or other of them has the opportunity; for the nobles,
seeing they cannot withstand the people, begin to cry up the reputation
of one of themselves, and they make him a prince, so that under his
shadow they can give vent to their ambitions. The people, finding
they cannot resist the nobles, also cry up the reputation of one of
themselves, and make him a prince so as to be defended by his authority.
He who obtains sovereignty by the assistance of the nobles maintains
himself with more difficulty than he who comes to it by the aid of
the people, because the former finds himself with many around him who
consider themselves his equals, and because of this he can neither rule
nor manage them to his liking. But he who reaches sovereignty by popular
favour finds himself alone, and has none around him, or few, who are not
prepared to obey him.

Besides this, one cannot by fair dealing, and without injury to others,
satisfy the nobles, but you can satisfy the people, for their object is
more righteous than that of the nobles, the latter wishing to oppress,
while the former only desire not to be oppressed. It is to be added also
that a prince can never secure himself against a hostile people, because
of their being too many, whilst from the nobles he can secure himself,
as they are few in number. The worst that a prince may expect from a
hostile people is to be abandoned by them; but from hostile nobles he
has not only to fear abandonment, but also that they will rise against
him; for they, being in these affairs more far-seeing and astute, always
come forward in time to save themselves, and to obtain favours from him
whom they expect to prevail. Further, the prince is compelled to live
always with the same people, but he can do well without the same nobles,
being able to make and unmake them daily, and to give or take away
authority when it pleases him.

Therefore, to make this point clearer, I say that the nobles ought to
be looked at mainly in two ways: that is to say, they either shape their
course in such a way as binds them entirely to your fortune, or they do
not. Those who so bind themselves, and are not rapacious, ought to be
honoured and loved; those who do not bind themselves may be dealt
with in two ways; they may fail to do this through pusillanimity and a
natural want of courage, in which case you ought to make use of them,
especially of those who are of good counsel; and thus, whilst in
prosperity you honour them, in adversity you do not have to fear them.
But when for their own ambitious ends they shun binding themselves, it
is a token that they are giving more thought to themselves than to you,
and a prince ought to guard against such, and to fear them as if they
were open enemies, because in adversity they always help to ruin him.

Therefore, one who becomes a prince through the favour of the people
ought to keep them friendly, and this he can easily do seeing they
only ask not to be oppressed by him. But one who, in opposition to
the people, becomes a prince by the favour of the nobles, ought, above
everything, to seek to win the people over to himself, and this he may
easily do if he takes them under his protection. Because men, when they
receive good from him of whom they were expecting evil, are bound more
closely to their benefactor; thus the people quickly become more devoted
to him than if he had been raised to the principality by their favours;
and the prince can win their affections in many ways, but as these vary
according to the circumstances one cannot give fixed rules, so I omit
them; but, I repeat, it is necessary for a prince to have the people
friendly, otherwise he has no security in adversity.

Nabis,(*) Prince of the Spartans, sustained the attack of all Greece,
and of a victorious Roman army, and against them he defended his country
and his government; and for the overcoming of this peril it was only
necessary for him to make himself secure against a few, but this would
not have been sufficient had the people been hostile. And do not let any
one impugn this statement with the trite proverb that "He who builds on
the people, builds on the mud," for this is true when a private citizen
makes a foundation there, and persuades himself that the people will
free him when he is oppressed by his enemies or by the magistrates;
wherein he would find himself very often deceived, as happened to the
Gracchi in Rome and to Messer Giorgio Scali(+) in Florence. But granted
a prince who has established himself as above, who can command, and is
a man of courage, undismayed in adversity, who does not fail in other
qualifications, and who, by his resolution and energy, keeps the whole
people encouraged--such a one will never find himself deceived in them,
and it will be shown that he has laid his foundations well.

     (*) Nabis, tyrant of Sparta, conquered by the Romans under
     Flamininus in 195 B.C.; killed 192 B.C.

     (+) Messer Giorgio Scali. This event is to be found in
     Machiavelli's "Florentine History," Book III.

These principalities are liable to danger when they are passing from the
civil to the absolute order of government, for such princes either rule
personally or through magistrates. In the latter case their government
is weaker and more insecure, because it rests entirely on the goodwill
of those citizens who are raised to the magistracy, and who, especially
in troubled times, can destroy the government with great ease, either
by intrigue or open defiance; and the prince has not the chance amid
tumults to exercise absolute authority, because the citizens and
subjects, accustomed to receive orders from magistrates, are not of
a mind to obey him amid these confusions, and there will always be in
doubtful times a scarcity of men whom he can trust. For such a prince
cannot rely upon what he observes in quiet times, when citizens have
need of the state, because then every one agrees with him; they all
promise, and when death is far distant they all wish to die for him;
but in troubled times, when the state has need of its citizens, then
he finds but few. And so much the more is this experiment dangerous,
inasmuch as it can only be tried once. Therefore a wise prince ought to
adopt such a course that his citizens will always in every sort and
kind of circumstance have need of the state and of him, and then he will
always find them faithful.




CHAPTER X -- CONCERNING THE WAY IN WHICH THE STRENGTH OF ALL
PRINCIPALITIES OUGHT TO BE MEASURED

It is necessary to consider another point in examining the character of
these principalities: that is, whether a prince has such power that, in
case of need, he can support himself with his own resources, or whether
he has always need of the assistance of others. And to make this quite
clear I say that I consider those who are able to support themselves by
their own resources who can, either by abundance of men or money, raise
a sufficient army to join battle against any one who comes to attack
them; and I consider those always to have need of others who cannot
show themselves against the enemy in the field, but are forced to
defend themselves by sheltering behind walls. The first case has been
discussed, but we will speak of it again should it recur. In the second
case one can say nothing except to encourage such princes to provision
and fortify their towns, and not on any account to defend the country.
And whoever shall fortify his town well, and shall have managed the
other concerns of his subjects in the way stated above, and to be often
repeated, will never be attacked without great caution, for men are
always adverse to enterprises where difficulties can be seen, and it
will be seen not to be an easy thing to attack one who has his town well
fortified, and is not hated by his people.

The cities of Germany are absolutely free, they own but little country
around them, and they yield obedience to the emperor when it suits
them, nor do they fear this or any other power they may have near them,
because they are fortified in such a way that every one thinks the
taking of them by assault would be tedious and difficult, seeing they
have proper ditches and walls, they have sufficient artillery, and they
always keep in public depots enough for one year's eating, drinking, and
firing. And beyond this, to keep the people quiet and without loss to
the state, they always have the means of giving work to the community
in those labours that are the life and strength of the city, and on
the pursuit of which the people are supported; they also hold military
exercises in repute, and moreover have many ordinances to uphold them.

Therefore, a prince who has a strong city, and had not made himself
odious, will not be attacked, or if any one should attack he will only
be driven off with disgrace; again, because that the affairs of this
world are so changeable, it is almost impossible to keep an army a whole
year in the field without being interfered with. And whoever should
reply: If the people have property outside the city, and see it burnt,
they will not remain patient, and the long siege and self-interest will
make them forget their prince; to this I answer that a powerful and
courageous prince will overcome all such difficulties by giving at one
time hope to his subjects that the evil will not be for long, at another
time fear of the cruelty of the enemy, then preserving himself adroitly
from those subjects who seem to him to be too bold.

Further, the enemy would naturally on his arrival at once burn and ruin
the country at the time when the spirits of the people are still hot and
ready for the defence; and, therefore, so much the less ought the prince
to hesitate; because after a time, when spirits have cooled, the damage
is already done, the ills are incurred, and there is no longer any
remedy; and therefore they are so much the more ready to unite with
their prince, he appearing to be under obligations to them now that
their houses have been burnt and their possessions ruined in his
defence. For it is the nature of men to be bound by the benefits they
confer as much as by those they receive. Therefore, if everything is
well considered, it will not be difficult for a wise prince to keep the
minds of his citizens steadfast from first to last, when he does not
fail to support and defend them.




CHAPTER XI -- CONCERNING ECCLESIASTICAL PRINCIPALITIES

It only remains now to speak of ecclesiastical principalities, touching
which all difficulties are prior to getting possession, because they
are acquired either by capacity or good fortune, and they can be held
without either; for they are sustained by the ancient ordinances of
religion, which are so all-powerful, and of such a character that the
principalities may be held no matter how their princes behave and live.
These princes alone have states and do not defend them; and they have
subjects and do not rule them; and the states, although unguarded, are
not taken from them, and the subjects, although not ruled, do not care,
and they have neither the desire nor the ability to alienate themselves.
Such principalities only are secure and happy. But being upheld by
powers, to which the human mind cannot reach, I shall speak no more of
them, because, being exalted and maintained by God, it would be the act
of a presumptuous and rash man to discuss them.

Nevertheless, if any one should ask of me how comes it that the
Church has attained such greatness in temporal power, seeing that from
Alexander backwards the Italian potentates (not only those who have been
called potentates, but every baron and lord, though the smallest)
have valued the temporal power very slightly--yet now a king of France
trembles before it, and it has been able to drive him from Italy, and
to ruin the Venetians--although this may be very manifest, it does not
appear to me superfluous to recall it in some measure to memory.

Before Charles, King of France, passed into Italy,(*) this country was
under the dominion of the Pope, the Venetians, the King of Naples, the
Duke of Milan, and the Florentines. These potentates had two principal
anxieties: the one, that no foreigner should enter Italy under arms; the
other, that none of themselves should seize more territory. Those about
whom there was the most anxiety were the Pope and the Venetians. To
restrain the Venetians the union of all the others was necessary, as it
was for the defence of Ferrara; and to keep down the Pope they made use
of the barons of Rome, who, being divided into two factions, Orsini and
Colonnesi, had always a pretext for disorder, and, standing with arms in
their hands under the eyes of the Pontiff, kept the pontificate weak and
powerless. And although there might arise sometimes a courageous pope,
such as Sixtus, yet neither fortune nor wisdom could rid him of these
annoyances. And the short life of a pope is also a cause of weakness;
for in the ten years, which is the average life of a pope, he can with
difficulty lower one of the factions; and if, so to speak, one people
should almost destroy the Colonnesi, another would arise hostile to the
Orsini, who would support their opponents, and yet would not have time
to ruin the Orsini. This was the reason why the temporal powers of the
pope were little esteemed in Italy.

     (*) Charles VIII invaded Italy in 1494.

Alexander the Sixth arose afterwards, who of all the pontiffs that
have ever been showed how a pope with both money and arms was able to
prevail; and through the instrumentality of the Duke Valentino, and by
reason of the entry of the French, he brought about all those things
which I have discussed above in the actions of the duke. And although
his intention was not to aggrandize the Church, but the duke,
nevertheless, what he did contributed to the greatness of the Church,
which, after his death and the ruin of the duke, became the heir to all
his labours.

Pope Julius came afterwards and found the Church strong, possessing all
the Romagna, the barons of Rome reduced to impotence, and, through the
chastisements of Alexander, the factions wiped out; he also found
the way open to accumulate money in a manner such as had never been
practised before Alexander's time. Such things Julius not only followed,
but improved upon, and he intended to gain Bologna, to ruin the
Venetians, and to drive the French out of Italy. All of these
enterprises prospered with him, and so much the more to his credit,
inasmuch as he did everything to strengthen the Church and not any
private person. He kept also the Orsini and Colonnesi factions within
the bounds in which he found them; and although there was among them
some mind to make disturbance, nevertheless he held two things firm: the
one, the greatness of the Church, with which he terrified them; and the
other, not allowing them to have their own cardinals, who caused the
disorders among them. For whenever these factions have their cardinals
they do not remain quiet for long, because cardinals foster the factions
in Rome and out of it, and the barons are compelled to support them, and
thus from the ambitions of prelates arise disorders and tumults among
the barons. For these reasons his Holiness Pope Leo(*) found the
pontificate most powerful, and it is to be hoped that, if others made it
great in arms, he will make it still greater and more venerated by his
goodness and infinite other virtues.

     (*) Pope Leo X was the Cardinal de' Medici.




CHAPTER XII -- HOW MANY KINDS OF SOLDIERY THERE ARE, AND CONCERNING
MERCENARIES

Having discoursed particularly on the characteristics of such
principalities as in the beginning I proposed to discuss, and having
considered in some degree the causes of their being good or bad, and
having shown the methods by which many have sought to acquire them and
to hold them, it now remains for me to discuss generally the means of
offence and defence which belong to each of them.

We have seen above how necessary it is for a prince to have his
foundations well laid, otherwise it follows of necessity he will go
to ruin. The chief foundations of all states, new as well as old or
composite, are good laws and good arms; and as there cannot be good laws
where the state is not well armed, it follows that where they are well
armed they have good laws. I shall leave the laws out of the discussion
and shall speak of the arms.

I say, therefore, that the arms with which a prince defends his state
are either his own, or they are mercenaries, auxiliaries, or mixed.
Mercenaries and auxiliaries are useless and dangerous; and if one holds
his state based on these arms, he will stand neither firm nor safe;
for they are disunited, ambitious, and without discipline, unfaithful,
valiant before friends, cowardly before enemies; they have neither the
fear of God nor fidelity to men, and destruction is deferred only so
long as the attack is; for in peace one is robbed by them, and in war
by the enemy. The fact is, they have no other attraction or reason for
keeping the field than a trifle of stipend, which is not sufficient
to make them willing to die for you. They are ready enough to be
your soldiers whilst you do not make war, but if war comes they take
themselves off or run from the foe; which I should have little trouble
to prove, for the ruin of Italy has been caused by nothing else than by
resting all her hopes for many years on mercenaries, and although they
formerly made some display and appeared valiant amongst themselves, yet
when the foreigners came they showed what they were. Thus it was that
Charles, King of France, was allowed to seize Italy with chalk in
hand;(*) and he who told us that our sins were the cause of it told the
truth, but they were not the sins he imagined, but those which I have
related. And as they were the sins of princes, it is the princes who
have also suffered the penalty.

     (*) "With chalk in hand," "col gesso." This is one of the
     _bons mots_ of Alexander VI, and refers to the ease with
     which Charles VIII seized Italy, implying that it was only
     necessary for him to send his quartermasters to chalk up the
     billets for his soldiers to conquer the country. Cf. "The
     History of Henry VII," by Lord Bacon: "King Charles had
     conquered the realm of Naples, and lost it again, in a kind
     of a felicity of a dream. He passed the whole length of
     Italy without resistance: so that it was true what Pope
     Alexander was wont to say: That the Frenchmen came into
     Italy with chalk in their hands, to mark up their lodgings,
     rather than with swords to fight."

I wish to demonstrate further the infelicity of these arms. The
mercenary captains are either capable men or they are not; if they
are, you cannot trust them, because they always aspire to their own
greatness, either by oppressing you, who are their master, or others
contrary to your intentions; but if the captain is not skilful, you are
ruined in the usual way.

And if it be urged that whoever is armed will act in the same way,
whether mercenary or not, I reply that when arms have to be resorted to,
either by a prince or a republic, then the prince ought to go in
person and perform the duty of a captain; the republic has to send its
citizens, and when one is sent who does not turn out satisfactorily, it
ought to recall him, and when one is worthy, to hold him by the laws so
that he does not leave the command. And experience has shown princes and
republics, single-handed, making the greatest progress, and mercenaries
doing nothing except damage; and it is more difficult to bring a
republic, armed with its own arms, under the sway of one of its citizens
than it is to bring one armed with foreign arms. Rome and Sparta stood
for many ages armed and free. The Switzers are completely armed and
quite free.

Of ancient mercenaries, for example, there are the Carthaginians, who
were oppressed by their mercenary soldiers after the first war with the
Romans, although the Carthaginians had their own citizens for captains.
After the death of Epaminondas, Philip of Macedon was made captain of
their soldiers by the Thebans, and after victory he took away their
liberty.

Duke Filippo being dead, the Milanese enlisted Francesco Sforza against
the Venetians, and he, having overcome the enemy at Caravaggio,(*)
allied himself with them to crush the Milanese, his masters. His father,
Sforza, having been engaged by Queen Johanna(+) of Naples, left her
unprotected, so that she was forced to throw herself into the arms of
the King of Aragon, in order to save her kingdom. And if the Venetians
and Florentines formerly extended their dominions by these arms, and yet
their captains did not make themselves princes, but have defended them,
I reply that the Florentines in this case have been favoured by chance,
for of the able captains, of whom they might have stood in fear, some
have not conquered, some have been opposed, and others have turned their
ambitions elsewhere. One who did not conquer was Giovanni Acuto,(%) and
since he did not conquer his fidelity cannot be proved; but every one
will acknowledge that, had he conquered, the Florentines would have
stood at his discretion. Sforza had the Bracceschi always against him,
so they watched each other. Francesco turned his ambition to Lombardy;
Braccio against the Church and the kingdom of Naples. But let us come
to that which happened a short while ago. The Florentines appointed as
their captain Pagolo Vitelli, a most prudent man, who from a private
position had risen to the greatest renown. If this man had taken Pisa,
nobody can deny that it would have been proper for the Florentines to
keep in with him, for if he became the soldier of their enemies they had
no means of resisting, and if they held to him they must obey him. The
Venetians, if their achievements are considered, will be seen to have
acted safely and gloriously so long as they sent to war their own men,
when with armed gentlemen and plebians they did valiantly. This was
before they turned to enterprises on land, but when they began to fight
on land they forsook this virtue and followed the custom of Italy. And
in the beginning of their expansion on land, through not having much
territory, and because of their great reputation, they had not much
to fear from their captains; but when they expanded, as under
Carmignuola,(#) they had a taste of this mistake; for, having found him
a most valiant man (they beat the Duke of Milan under his leadership),
and, on the other hand, knowing how lukewarm he was in the war, they
feared they would no longer conquer under him, and for this reason they
were not willing, nor were they able, to let him go; and so, not to lose
again that which they had acquired, they were compelled, in order to
secure themselves, to murder him. They had afterwards for their
captains Bartolomeo da Bergamo, Roberto da San Severino, the count of
Pitigliano,(&) and the like, under whom they had to dread loss and not
gain, as happened afterwards at Vaila,($) where in one battle they
lost that which in eight hundred years they had acquired with so much
trouble. Because from such arms conquests come but slowly, long delayed
and inconsiderable, but the losses sudden and portentous.

     (*) Battle of Caravaggio, 15th September 1448.

     (+) Johanna II of Naples, the widow of Ladislao, King of
     Naples.

     (%) Giovanni Acuto. An English knight whose name was Sir
     John Hawkwood. He fought in the English wars in France, and
     was knighted by Edward III; afterwards he collected a body
     of troops and went into Italy. These became the famous
     "White Company." He took part in many wars, and died in
     Florence in 1394. He was born about 1320 at Sible Hedingham,
     a village in Essex. He married Domnia, a daughter of Bernabo
     Visconti.

     (#) Carmignuola. Francesco Bussone, born at Carmagnola about
     1390, executed at Venice, 5th May 1432.

     (&) Bartolomeo Colleoni of Bergamo; died 1457. Roberto of
     San Severino; died fighting for Venice against Sigismund,
     Duke of Austria, in 1487. "Primo capitano in Italia."--
     Machiavelli. Count of Pitigliano; Nicolo Orsini, born 1442,
     died 1510.

     ($) Battle of Vaila in 1509.

And as with these examples I have reached Italy, which has been ruled
for many years by mercenaries, I wish to discuss them more seriously,
in order that, having seen their rise and progress, one may be better
prepared to counteract them. You must understand that the empire has
recently come to be repudiated in Italy, that the Pope has acquired more
temporal power, and that Italy has been divided up into more states,
for the reason that many of the great cities took up arms against their
nobles, who, formerly favoured by the emperor, were oppressing them,
whilst the Church was favouring them so as to gain authority in temporal
power: in many others their citizens became princes. From this it came
to pass that Italy fell partly into the hands of the Church and of
republics, and, the Church consisting of priests and the republic of
citizens unaccustomed to arms, both commenced to enlist foreigners.

The first who gave renown to this soldiery was Alberigo da Conio,(*) the
Romagnian. From the school of this man sprang, among others, Braccio and
Sforza, who in their time were the arbiters of Italy. After these came
all the other captains who till now have directed the arms of Italy;
and the end of all their valour has been, that she has been overrun
by Charles, robbed by Louis, ravaged by Ferdinand, and insulted by the
Switzers. The principle that has guided them has been, first, to lower
the credit of infantry so that they might increase their own. They did
this because, subsisting on their pay and without territory, they were
unable to support many soldiers, and a few infantry did not give them
any authority; so they were led to employ cavalry, with a moderate force
of which they were maintained and honoured; and affairs were brought to
such a pass that, in an army of twenty thousand soldiers, there were
not to be found two thousand foot soldiers. They had, besides this, used
every art to lessen fatigue and danger to themselves and their soldiers,
not killing in the fray, but taking prisoners and liberating without
ransom. They did not attack towns at night, nor did the garrisons of the
towns attack encampments at night; they did not surround the camp either
with stockade or ditch, nor did they campaign in the winter. All these
things were permitted by their military rules, and devised by them to
avoid, as I have said, both fatigue and dangers; thus they have brought
Italy to slavery and contempt.

     (*) Alberigo da Conio. Alberico da Barbiano, Count of Cunio
     in Romagna. He was the leader of the famous "Company of St
     George," composed entirely of Italian soldiers. He died in
     1409.




CHAPTER XIII -- CONCERNING AUXILIARIES, MIXED SOLDIERY, AND ONE'S OWN

Auxiliaries, which are the other useless arm, are employed when a prince
is called in with his forces to aid and defend, as was done by Pope
Julius in the most recent times; for he, having, in the enterprise
against Ferrara, had poor proof of his mercenaries, turned to
auxiliaries, and stipulated with Ferdinand, King of Spain,(*) for his
assistance with men and arms. These arms may be useful and good
in themselves, but for him who calls them in they are always
disadvantageous; for losing, one is undone, and winning, one is their
captive.

     (*) Ferdinand V (F. II of Aragon and Sicily, F. III of
     Naples), surnamed "The Catholic," born 1452, died 1516.

And although ancient histories may be full of examples, I do not wish
to leave this recent one of Pope Julius the Second, the peril of which
cannot fail to be perceived; for he, wishing to get Ferrara, threw
himself entirely into the hands of the foreigner. But his good fortune
brought about a third event, so that he did not reap the fruit of his
rash choice; because, having his auxiliaries routed at Ravenna, and
the Switzers having risen and driven out the conquerors (against all
expectation, both his and others), it so came to pass that he did
not become prisoner to his enemies, they having fled, nor to his
auxiliaries, he having conquered by other arms than theirs.

The Florentines, being entirely without arms, sent ten thousand
Frenchmen to take Pisa, whereby they ran more danger than at any other
time of their troubles.

The Emperor of Constantinople,(*) to oppose his neighbours, sent ten
thousand Turks into Greece, who, on the war being finished, were not
willing to quit; this was the beginning of the servitude of Greece to
the infidels.

     (*) Joannes Cantacuzenus, born 1300, died 1383.

Therefore, let him who has no desire to conquer make use of these arms,
for they are much more hazardous than mercenaries, because with them the
ruin is ready made; they are all united, all yield obedience to others;
but with mercenaries, when they have conquered, more time and better
opportunities are needed to injure you; they are not all of one
community, they are found and paid by you, and a third party, which you
have made their head, is not able all at once to assume enough authority
to injure you. In conclusion, in mercenaries dastardy is most dangerous;
in auxiliaries, valour. The wise prince, therefore, has always avoided
these arms and turned to his own; and has been willing rather to lose
with them than to conquer with the others, not deeming that a real
victory which is gained with the arms of others.

I shall never hesitate to cite Cesare Borgia and his actions. This duke
entered the Romagna with auxiliaries, taking there only French soldiers,
and with them he captured Imola and Forli; but afterwards, such forces
not appearing to him reliable, he turned to mercenaries, discerning less
danger in them, and enlisted the Orsini and Vitelli; whom presently,
on handling and finding them doubtful, unfaithful, and dangerous, he
destroyed and turned to his own men. And the difference between one
and the other of these forces can easily be seen when one considers
the difference there was in the reputation of the duke, when he had the
French, when he had the Orsini and Vitelli, and when he relied on his
own soldiers, on whose fidelity he could always count and found it ever
increasing; he was never esteemed more highly than when every one saw
that he was complete master of his own forces.

I was not intending to go beyond Italian and recent examples, but I am
unwilling to leave out Hiero, the Syracusan, he being one of those I
have named above. This man, as I have said, made head of the army by the
Syracusans, soon found out that a mercenary soldiery, constituted like
our Italian condottieri, was of no use; and it appearing to him that he
could neither keep them not let them go, he had them all cut to pieces,
and afterwards made war with his own forces and not with aliens.

I wish also to recall to memory an instance from the Old Testament
applicable to this subject. David offered himself to Saul to fight with
Goliath, the Philistine champion, and, to give him courage, Saul armed
him with his own weapons; which David rejected as soon as he had them
on his back, saying he could make no use of them, and that he wished to
meet the enemy with his sling and his knife. In conclusion, the arms of
others either fall from your back, or they weigh you down, or they bind
you fast.

Charles the Seventh,(*) the father of King Louis the Eleventh,(+) having
by good fortune and valour liberated France from the English, recognized
the necessity of being armed with forces of his own, and he established
in his kingdom ordinances concerning men-at-arms and infantry.
Afterwards his son, King Louis, abolished the infantry and began to
enlist the Switzers, which mistake, followed by others, is, as is now
seen, a source of peril to that kingdom; because, having raised the
reputation of the Switzers, he has entirely diminished the value of
his own arms, for he has destroyed the infantry altogether; and his
men-at-arms he has subordinated to others, for, being as they are so
accustomed to fight along with Switzers, it does not appear that they
can now conquer without them. Hence it arises that the French cannot
stand against the Switzers, and without the Switzers they do not come
off well against others. The armies of the French have thus become
mixed, partly mercenary and partly national, both of which arms together
are much better than mercenaries alone or auxiliaries alone, but much
inferior to one's own forces. And this example proves it, for the
kingdom of France would be unconquerable if the ordinance of Charles had
been enlarged or maintained.

     (*) Charles VII of France, surnamed "The Victorious," born
     1403, died 1461.

     (+) Louis XI, son of the above, born 1423, died 1483.

But the scanty wisdom of man, on entering into an affair which looks
well at first, cannot discern the poison that is hidden in it, as I have
said above of hectic fevers. Therefore, if he who rules a principality
cannot recognize evils until they are upon him, he is not truly wise;
and this insight is given to few. And if the first disaster to the Roman
Empire(*) should be examined, it will be found to have commenced only
with the enlisting of the Goths; because from that time the vigour of
the Roman Empire began to decline, and all that valour which had raised
it passed away to others.

     (*) "Many speakers to the House the other night in the
     debate on the reduction of armaments seemed to show a most
     lamentable ignorance of the conditions under which the
     British Empire maintains its existence. When Mr Balfour
     replied to the allegations that the Roman Empire sank under
     the weight of its military obligations, he said that this
     was 'wholly unhistorical.' He might well have added that the
     Roman power was at its zenith when every citizen
     acknowledged his liability to fight for the State, but that
     it began to decline as soon as this obligation was no longer
     recognized."--Pall Mall Gazette, 15th May 1906.

I conclude, therefore, that no principality is secure without having its
own forces; on the contrary, it is entirely dependent on good fortune,
not having the valour which in adversity would defend it. And it has
always been the opinion and judgment of wise men that nothing can be so
uncertain or unstable as fame or power not founded on its own strength.
And one's own forces are those which are composed either of subjects,
citizens, or dependents; all others are mercenaries or auxiliaries. And
the way to make ready one's own forces will be easily found if the rules
suggested by me shall be reflected upon, and if one will consider
how Philip, the father of Alexander the Great, and many republics and
princes have armed and organized themselves, to which rules I entirely
commit myself.




CHAPTER XIV -- THAT WHICH CONCERNS A PRINCE ON THE SUBJECT OF THE ART OF
WAR

A prince ought to have no other aim or thought, nor select anything else
for his study, than war and its rules and discipline; for this is the
sole art that belongs to him who rules, and it is of such force that it
not only upholds those who are born princes, but it often enables men
to rise from a private station to that rank. And, on the contrary, it is
seen that when princes have thought more of ease than of arms they have
lost their states. And the first cause of your losing it is to neglect
this art; and what enables you to acquire a state is to be master of
the art. Francesco Sforza, through being martial, from a private person
became Duke of Milan; and the sons, through avoiding the hardships and
troubles of arms, from dukes became private persons. For among other
evils which being unarmed brings you, it causes you to be despised, and
this is one of those ignominies against which a prince ought to guard
himself, as is shown later on. Because there is nothing proportionate
between the armed and the unarmed; and it is not reasonable that he who
is armed should yield obedience willingly to him who is unarmed, or that
the unarmed man should be secure among armed servants. Because, there
being in the one disdain and in the other suspicion, it is not possible
for them to work well together. And therefore a prince who does not
understand the art of war, over and above the other misfortunes already
mentioned, cannot be respected by his soldiers, nor can he rely on them.
He ought never, therefore, to have out of his thoughts this subject of
war, and in peace he should addict himself more to its exercise than in
war; this he can do in two ways, the one by action, the other by study.

As regards action, he ought above all things to keep his men well
organized and drilled, to follow incessantly the chase, by which he
accustoms his body to hardships, and learns something of the nature of
localities, and gets to find out how the mountains rise, how the valleys
open out, how the plains lie, and to understand the nature of rivers and
marshes, and in all this to take the greatest care. Which knowledge
is useful in two ways. Firstly, he learns to know his country, and
is better able to undertake its defence; afterwards, by means of the
knowledge and observation of that locality, he understands with ease any
other which it may be necessary for him to study hereafter; because
the hills, valleys, and plains, and rivers and marshes that are, for
instance, in Tuscany, have a certain resemblance to those of other
countries, so that with a knowledge of the aspect of one country one can
easily arrive at a knowledge of others. And the prince that lacks this
skill lacks the essential which it is desirable that a captain should
possess, for it teaches him to surprise his enemy, to select quarters,
to lead armies, to array the battle, to besiege towns to advantage.

Philopoemen,(*) Prince of the Achaeans, among other praises which
writers have bestowed on him, is commended because in time of peace he
never had anything in his mind but the rules of war; and when he was in
the country with friends, he often stopped and reasoned with them: "If
the enemy should be upon that hill, and we should find ourselves here
with our army, with whom would be the advantage? How should one best
advance to meet him, keeping the ranks? If we should wish to retreat,
how ought we to pursue?" And he would set forth to them, as he went, all
the chances that could befall an army; he would listen to their opinion
and state his, confirming it with reasons, so that by these continual
discussions there could never arise, in time of war, any unexpected
circumstances that he could not deal with.

     (*) Philopoemen, "the last of the Greeks," born 252 B.C.,
     died 183 B.C.

But to exercise the intellect the prince should read histories, and
study there the actions of illustrious men, to see how they have borne
themselves in war, to examine the causes of their victories and defeat,
so as to avoid the latter and imitate the former; and above all do as
an illustrious man did, who took as an exemplar one who had been praised
and famous before him, and whose achievements and deeds he always kept
in his mind, as it is said Alexander the Great imitated Achilles, Caesar
Alexander, Scipio Cyrus. And whoever reads the life of Cyrus, written
by Xenophon, will recognize afterwards in the life of Scipio how that
imitation was his glory, and how in chastity, affability, humanity, and
liberality Scipio conformed to those things which have been written of
Cyrus by Xenophon. A wise prince ought to observe some such rules, and
never in peaceful times stand idle, but increase his resources with
industry in such a way that they may be available to him in adversity,
so that if fortune chances it may find him prepared to resist her blows.



CHAPTER XV -- CONCERNING THINGS FOR WHICH MEN, AND ESPECIALLY PRINCES,
ARE PRAISED OR BLAMED

It remains now to see what ought to be the rules of conduct for a prince
towards subject and friends. And as I know that many have written on
this point, I expect I shall be considered presumptuous in mentioning it
again, especially as in discussing it I shall depart from the methods of
other people. But, it being my intention to write a thing which shall
be useful to him who apprehends it, it appears to me more appropriate to
follow up the real truth of the matter than the imagination of it; for
many have pictured republics and principalities which in fact have never
been known or seen, because how one lives is so far distant from how one
ought to live, that he who neglects what is done for what ought to
be done, sooner effects his ruin than his preservation; for a man who
wishes to act entirely up to his professions of virtue soon meets with
what destroys him among so much that is evil.

Hence it is necessary for a prince wishing to hold his own to know
how to do wrong, and to make use of it or not according to necessity.
Therefore, putting on one side imaginary things concerning a prince, and
discussing those which are real, I say that all men when they are spoken
of, and chiefly princes for being more highly placed, are remarkable
for some of those qualities which bring them either blame or praise; and
thus it is that one is reputed liberal, another miserly, using a Tuscan
term (because an avaricious person in our language is still he who
desires to possess by robbery, whilst we call one miserly who deprives
himself too much of the use of his own); one is reputed generous,
one rapacious; one cruel, one compassionate; one faithless, another
faithful; one effeminate and cowardly, another bold and brave; one
affable, another haughty; one lascivious, another chaste; one sincere,
another cunning; one hard, another easy; one grave, another frivolous;
one religious, another unbelieving, and the like. And I know that every
one will confess that it would be most praiseworthy in a prince to
exhibit all the above qualities that are considered good; but because
they can neither be entirely possessed nor observed, for human
conditions do not permit it, it is necessary for him to be sufficiently
prudent that he may know how to avoid the reproach of those vices which
would lose him his state; and also to keep himself, if it be possible,
from those which would not lose him it; but this not being possible, he
may with less hesitation abandon himself to them. And again, he need
not make himself uneasy at incurring a reproach for those vices without
which the state can only be saved with difficulty, for if everything is
considered carefully, it will be found that something which looks like
virtue, if followed, would be his ruin; whilst something else, which
looks like vice, yet followed brings him security and prosperity.




CHAPTER XVI -- CONCERNING LIBERALITY AND MEANNESS

Commencing then with the first of the above-named characteristics, I say
that it would be well to be reputed liberal. Nevertheless, liberality
exercised in a way that does not bring you the reputation for it,
injures you; for if one exercises it honestly and as it should be
exercised, it may not become known, and you will not avoid the reproach
of its opposite. Therefore, any one wishing to maintain among men the
name of liberal is obliged to avoid no attribute of magnificence; so
that a prince thus inclined will consume in such acts all his property,
and will be compelled in the end, if he wish to maintain the name
of liberal, to unduly weigh down his people, and tax them, and do
everything he can to get money. This will soon make him odious to his
subjects, and becoming poor he will be little valued by any one; thus,
with his liberality, having offended many and rewarded few, he is
affected by the very first trouble and imperilled by whatever may be the
first danger; recognizing this himself, and wishing to draw back from
it, he runs at once into the reproach of being miserly.

Therefore, a prince, not being able to exercise this virtue of
liberality in such a way that it is recognized, except to his cost, if
he is wise he ought not to fear the reputation of being mean, for in
time he will come to be more considered than if liberal, seeing that
with his economy his revenues are enough, that he can defend himself
against all attacks, and is able to engage in enterprises without
burdening his people; thus it comes to pass that he exercises liberality
towards all from whom he does not take, who are numberless, and meanness
towards those to whom he does not give, who are few.

We have not seen great things done in our time except by those who have
been considered mean; the rest have failed. Pope Julius the Second was
assisted in reaching the papacy by a reputation for liberality, yet he
did not strive afterwards to keep it up, when he made war on the King of
France; and he made many wars without imposing any extraordinary tax on
his subjects, for he supplied his additional expenses out of his long
thriftiness. The present King of Spain would not have undertaken or
conquered in so many enterprises if he had been reputed liberal. A
prince, therefore, provided that he has not to rob his subjects, that he
can defend himself, that he does not become poor and abject, that he
is not forced to become rapacious, ought to hold of little account
a reputation for being mean, for it is one of those vices which will
enable him to govern.

And if any one should say: Caesar obtained empire by liberality, and
many others have reached the highest positions by having been liberal,
and by being considered so, I answer: Either you are a prince in
fact, or in a way to become one. In the first case this liberality is
dangerous, in the second it is very necessary to be considered liberal;
and Caesar was one of those who wished to become pre-eminent in Rome;
but if he had survived after becoming so, and had not moderated his
expenses, he would have destroyed his government. And if any one should
reply: Many have been princes, and have done great things with armies,
who have been considered very liberal, I reply: Either a prince spends
that which is his own or his subjects' or else that of others. In the
first case he ought to be sparing, in the second he ought not to neglect
any opportunity for liberality. And to the prince who goes forth with
his army, supporting it by pillage, sack, and extortion, handling that
which belongs to others, this liberality is necessary, otherwise he
would not be followed by soldiers. And of that which is neither yours
nor your subjects' you can be a ready giver, as were Cyrus, Caesar, and
Alexander; because it does not take away your reputation if you squander
that of others, but adds to it; it is only squandering your own that
injures you.

And there is nothing wastes so rapidly as liberality, for even whilst
you exercise it you lose the power to do so, and so become either poor
or despised, or else, in avoiding poverty, rapacious and hated. And a
prince should guard himself, above all things, against being despised
and hated; and liberality leads you to both. Therefore it is wiser to
have a reputation for meanness which brings reproach without hatred,
than to be compelled through seeking a reputation for liberality to
incur a name for rapacity which begets reproach with hatred.




CHAPTER XVII -- CONCERNING CRUELTY AND CLEMENCY, AND WHETHER IT IS
BETTER TO BE LOVED THAN FEARED

Coming now to the other qualities mentioned above, I say that every
prince ought to desire to be considered clement and not cruel.
Nevertheless he ought to take care not to misuse this clemency. Cesare
Borgia was considered cruel; notwithstanding, his cruelty reconciled the
Romagna, unified it, and restored it to peace and loyalty. And if this
be rightly considered, he will be seen to have been much more merciful
than the Florentine people, who, to avoid a reputation for cruelty,
permitted Pistoia to be destroyed.(*) Therefore a prince, so long as he
keeps his subjects united and loyal, ought not to mind the reproach of
cruelty; because with a few examples he will be more merciful than those
who, through too much mercy, allow disorders to arise, from which follow
murders or robberies; for these are wont to injure the whole people,
whilst those executions which originate with a prince offend the
individual only.

     (*) During the rioting between the Cancellieri and
     Panciatichi factions in 1502 and 1503.

And of all princes, it is impossible for the new prince to avoid the
imputation of cruelty, owing to new states being full of dangers. Hence
Virgil, through the mouth of Dido, excuses the inhumanity of her reign
owing to its being new, saying:

     "Res dura, et regni novitas me talia cogunt
     Moliri, et late fines custode tueri."(*)

Nevertheless he ought to be slow to believe and to act, nor should he
himself show fear, but proceed in a temperate manner with prudence and
humanity, so that too much confidence may not make him incautious and
too much distrust render him intolerable.

     (*) . . . against my will, my fate
     A throne unsettled, and an infant state,
     Bid me defend my realms with all my pow'rs,
     And guard with these severities my shores.

     Christopher Pitt.

Upon this a question arises: whether it be better to be loved than
feared or feared than loved? It may be answered that one should wish to
be both, but, because it is difficult to unite them in one person, it
is much safer to be feared than loved, when, of the two, either must be
dispensed with. Because this is to be asserted in general of men, that
they are ungrateful, fickle, false, cowardly, covetous, and as long as
you succeed they are yours entirely; they will offer you their blood,
property, life, and children, as is said above, when the need is far
distant; but when it approaches they turn against you. And that
prince who, relying entirely on their promises, has neglected other
precautions, is ruined; because friendships that are obtained by
payments, and not by greatness or nobility of mind, may indeed be
earned, but they are not secured, and in time of need cannot be relied
upon; and men have less scruple in offending one who is beloved than one
who is feared, for love is preserved by the link of obligation which,
owing to the baseness of men, is broken at every opportunity for their
advantage; but fear preserves you by a dread of punishment which never
fails.

Nevertheless a prince ought to inspire fear in such a way that, if he
does not win love, he avoids hatred; because he can endure very well
being feared whilst he is not hated, which will always be as long as he
abstains from the property of his citizens and subjects and from their
women. But when it is necessary for him to proceed against the life of
someone, he must do it on proper justification and for manifest cause,
but above all things he must keep his hands off the property of others,
because men more quickly forget the death of their father than the loss
of their patrimony. Besides, pretexts for taking away the property are
never wanting; for he who has once begun to live by robbery will always
find pretexts for seizing what belongs to others; but reasons for taking
life, on the contrary, are more difficult to find and sooner lapse. But
when a prince is with his army, and has under control a multitude of
soldiers, then it is quite necessary for him to disregard the reputation
of cruelty, for without it he would never hold his army united or
disposed to its duties.

Among the wonderful deeds of Hannibal this one is enumerated: that
having led an enormous army, composed of many various races of men,
to fight in foreign lands, no dissensions arose either among them or
against the prince, whether in his bad or in his good fortune. This
arose from nothing else than his inhuman cruelty, which, with his
boundless valour, made him revered and terrible in the sight of
his soldiers, but without that cruelty, his other virtues were not
sufficient to produce this effect. And short-sighted writers admire
his deeds from one point of view and from another condemn the principal
cause of them. That it is true his other virtues would not have been
sufficient for him may be proved by the case of Scipio, that most
excellent man, not only of his own times but within the memory of man,
against whom, nevertheless, his army rebelled in Spain; this arose from
nothing but his too great forbearance, which gave his soldiers more
license than is consistent with military discipline. For this he was
upbraided in the Senate by Fabius Maximus, and called the corrupter of
the Roman soldiery. The Locrians were laid waste by a legate of Scipio,
yet they were not avenged by him, nor was the insolence of the legate
punished, owing entirely to his easy nature. Insomuch that someone in
the Senate, wishing to excuse him, said there were many men who knew
much better how not to err than to correct the errors of others.
This disposition, if he had been continued in the command, would have
destroyed in time the fame and glory of Scipio; but, he being under the
control of the Senate, this injurious characteristic not only concealed
itself, but contributed to his glory.

Returning to the question of being feared or loved, I come to the
conclusion that, men loving according to their own will and fearing
according to that of the prince, a wise prince should establish himself
on that which is in his own control and not in that of others; he must
endeavour only to avoid hatred, as is noted.



CHAPTER XVIII(*) -- CONCERNING THE WAY IN WHICH PRINCES SHOULD KEEP
FAITH

     (*) "The present chapter has given greater offence than any
     other portion of Machiavelli's writings." Burd, "Il
     Principe," p. 297.

Every one admits how praiseworthy it is in a prince to keep faith, and
to live with integrity and not with craft. Nevertheless our experience
has been that those princes who have done great things have held good
faith of little account, and have known how to circumvent the intellect
of men by craft, and in the end have overcome those who have relied on
their word. You must know there are two ways of contesting,(*) the one
by the law, the other by force; the first method is proper to men, the
second to beasts; but because the first is frequently not sufficient, it
is necessary to have recourse to the second. Therefore it is necessary
for a prince to understand how to avail himself of the beast and the
man. This has been figuratively taught to princes by ancient writers,
who describe how Achilles and many other princes of old were given to
the Centaur Chiron to nurse, who brought them up in his discipline;
which means solely that, as they had for a teacher one who was half
beast and half man, so it is necessary for a prince to know how to make
use of both natures, and that one without the other is not durable. A
prince, therefore, being compelled knowingly to adopt the beast, ought
to choose the fox and the lion; because the lion cannot defend himself
against snares and the fox cannot defend himself against wolves.
Therefore, it is necessary to be a fox to discover the snares and a
lion to terrify the wolves. Those who rely simply on the lion do not
understand what they are about. Therefore a wise lord cannot, nor ought
he to, keep faith when such observance may be turned against him, and
when the reasons that caused him to pledge it exist no longer. If men
were entirely good this precept would not hold, but because they are
bad, and will not keep faith with you, you too are not bound to observe
it with them. Nor will there ever be wanting to a prince legitimate
reasons to excuse this non-observance. Of this endless modern examples
could be given, showing how many treaties and engagements have been made
void and of no effect through the faithlessness of princes; and he who
has known best how to employ the fox has succeeded best.

     (*) "Contesting," i.e. "striving for mastery." Mr Burd
     points out that this passage is imitated directly from
     Cicero's "De Officiis": "Nam cum sint duo genera decertandi,
     unum per disceptationem, alterum per vim; cumque illud
     proprium sit hominis, hoc beluarum; confugiendum est ad
     posterius, si uti non licet superiore."

But it is necessary to know well how to disguise this characteristic,
and to be a great pretender and dissembler; and men are so simple, and
so subject to present necessities, that he who seeks to deceive will
always find someone who will allow himself to be deceived. One recent
example I cannot pass over in silence. Alexander the Sixth did nothing
else but deceive men, nor ever thought of doing otherwise, and he
always found victims; for there never was a man who had greater power
in asserting, or who with greater oaths would affirm a thing, yet would
observe it less; nevertheless his deceits always succeeded according to
his wishes,(*) because he well understood this side of mankind.

     (*) "Nondimanco sempre gli succederono gli inganni (ad
     votum)." The words "ad votum" are omitted in the Testina
     addition, 1550.

     Alexander never did what he said,
     Cesare never said what he did.

     Italian Proverb.

Therefore it is unnecessary for a prince to have all the good qualities
I have enumerated, but it is very necessary to appear to have them. And
I shall dare to say this also, that to have them and always to observe
them is injurious, and that to appear to have them is useful; to appear
merciful, faithful, humane, religious, upright, and to be so, but with a
mind so framed that should you require not to be so, you may be able and
know how to change to the opposite.

And you have to understand this, that a prince, especially a new one,
cannot observe all those things for which men are esteemed, being often
forced, in order to maintain the state, to act contrary to fidelity,(*)
friendship, humanity, and religion. Therefore it is necessary for him to
have a mind ready to turn itself accordingly as the winds and variations
of fortune force it, yet, as I have said above, not to diverge from the
good if he can avoid doing so, but, if compelled, then to know how to
set about it.

     (*) "Contrary to fidelity" or "faith," "contro alla fede,"
     and "tutto fede," "altogether faithful," in the next
     paragraph. It is noteworthy that these two phrases, "contro
     alla fede" and "tutto fede," were omitted in the Testina
     edition, which was published with the sanction of the papal
     authorities. It may be that the meaning attached to the word
     "fede" was "the faith," i.e. the Catholic creed, and not as
     rendered here "fidelity" and "faithful." Observe that the
     word "religione" was suffered to stand in the text of the
     Testina, being used to signify indifferently every shade of
     belief, as witness "the religion," a phrase inevitably
     employed to designate the Huguenot heresy. South in his
     Sermon IX, p. 69, ed. 1843, comments on this passage as
     follows: "That great patron and Coryphaeus of this tribe,
     Nicolo Machiavel, laid down this for a master rule in his
     political scheme: 'That the show of religion was helpful to
     the politician, but the reality of it hurtful and
     pernicious.'"

For this reason a prince ought to take care that he never lets anything
slip from his lips that is not replete with the above-named five
qualities, that he may appear to him who sees and hears him altogether
merciful, faithful, humane, upright, and religious. There is nothing
more necessary to appear to have than this last quality, inasmuch as men
judge generally more by the eye than by the hand, because it belongs to
everybody to see you, to few to come in touch with you. Every one sees
what you appear to be, few really know what you are, and those few dare
not oppose themselves to the opinion of the many, who have the majesty
of the state to defend them; and in the actions of all men, and
especially of princes, which it is not prudent to challenge, one judges
by the result.

For that reason, let a prince have the credit of conquering and holding
his state, the means will always be considered honest, and he will be
praised by everybody; because the vulgar are always taken by what a
thing seems to be and by what comes of it; and in the world there are
only the vulgar, for the few find a place there only when the many have
no ground to rest on.

One prince(*) of the present time, whom it is not well to name, never
preaches anything else but peace and good faith, and to both he is
most hostile, and either, if he had kept it, would have deprived him of
reputation and kingdom many a time.

     (*) Ferdinand of Aragon. "When Machiavelli was writing 'The
     Prince' it would have been clearly impossible to mention
     Ferdinand's name here without giving offence." Burd's "Il
     Principe," p. 308.




CHAPTER XIX -- THAT ONE SHOULD AVOID BEING DESPISED AND HATED

Now, concerning the characteristics of which mention is made above, I
have spoken of the more important ones, the others I wish to discuss
briefly under this generality, that the prince must consider, as has
been in part said before, how to avoid those things which will make him
hated or contemptible; and as often as he shall have succeeded he
will have fulfilled his part, and he need not fear any danger in other
reproaches.

It makes him hated above all things, as I have said, to be rapacious,
and to be a violator of the property and women of his subjects, from
both of which he must abstain. And when neither their property nor their
honor is touched, the majority of men live content, and he has only to
contend with the ambition of a few, whom he can curb with ease in many
ways.

It makes him contemptible to be considered fickle, frivolous,
effeminate, mean-spirited, irresolute, from all of which a prince should
guard himself as from a rock; and he should endeavour to show in his
actions greatness, courage, gravity, and fortitude; and in his
private dealings with his subjects let him show that his judgments are
irrevocable, and maintain himself in such reputation that no one can
hope either to deceive him or to get round him.

That prince is highly esteemed who conveys this impression of himself,
and he who is highly esteemed is not easily conspired against; for,
provided it is well known that he is an excellent man and revered by
his people, he can only be attacked with difficulty. For this reason
a prince ought to have two fears, one from within, on account of his
subjects, the other from without, on account of external powers. From
the latter he is defended by being well armed and having good allies,
and if he is well armed he will have good friends, and affairs will
always remain quiet within when they are quiet without, unless they
should have been already disturbed by conspiracy; and even should
affairs outside be disturbed, if he has carried out his preparations and
has lived as I have said, as long as he does not despair, he will resist
every attack, as I said Nabis the Spartan did.

But concerning his subjects, when affairs outside are disturbed he has
only to fear that they will conspire secretly, from which a prince
can easily secure himself by avoiding being hated and despised, and by
keeping the people satisfied with him, which it is most necessary
for him to accomplish, as I said above at length. And one of the most
efficacious remedies that a prince can have against conspiracies is not
to be hated and despised by the people, for he who conspires against
a prince always expects to please them by his removal; but when the
conspirator can only look forward to offending them, he will not have
the courage to take such a course, for the difficulties that confront
a conspirator are infinite. And as experience shows, many have been the
conspiracies, but few have been successful; because he who conspires
cannot act alone, nor can he take a companion except from those whom he
believes to be malcontents, and as soon as you have opened your mind
to a malcontent you have given him the material with which to content
himself, for by denouncing you he can look for every advantage; so that,
seeing the gain from this course to be assured, and seeing the other
to be doubtful and full of dangers, he must be a very rare friend, or a
thoroughly obstinate enemy of the prince, to keep faith with you.

And, to reduce the matter into a small compass, I say that, on the side
of the conspirator, there is nothing but fear, jealousy, prospect of
punishment to terrify him; but on the side of the prince there is the
majesty of the principality, the laws, the protection of friends and
the state to defend him; so that, adding to all these things the
popular goodwill, it is impossible that any one should be so rash as to
conspire. For whereas in general the conspirator has to fear before the
execution of his plot, in this case he has also to fear the sequel to
the crime; because on account of it he has the people for an enemy, and
thus cannot hope for any escape.

Endless examples could be given on this subject, but I will be content
with one, brought to pass within the memory of our fathers. Messer
Annibale Bentivogli, who was prince in Bologna (grandfather of the
present Annibale), having been murdered by the Canneschi, who had
conspired against him, not one of his family survived but Messer
Giovanni,(*) who was in childhood: immediately after his assassination
the people rose and murdered all the Canneschi. This sprung from the
popular goodwill which the house of Bentivogli enjoyed in those days in
Bologna; which was so great that, although none remained there after the
death of Annibale who was able to rule the state, the Bolognese, having
information that there was one of the Bentivogli family in Florence,
who up to that time had been considered the son of a blacksmith, sent to
Florence for him and gave him the government of their city, and it was
ruled by him until Messer Giovanni came in due course to the government.

     (*) Giovanni Bentivogli, born in Bologna 1438, died at Milan
     1508. He ruled Bologna from 1462 to 1506. Machiavelli's
     strong condemnation of conspiracies may get its edge from
     his own very recent experience (February 1513), when he had
     been arrested and tortured for his alleged complicity in the
     Boscoli conspiracy.

For this reason I consider that a prince ought to reckon conspiracies
of little account when his people hold him in esteem; but when it
is hostile to him, and bears hatred towards him, he ought to fear
everything and everybody. And well-ordered states and wise princes have
taken every care not to drive the nobles to desperation, and to keep the
people satisfied and contented, for this is one of the most important
objects a prince can have.

Among the best ordered and governed kingdoms of our times is France, and
in it are found many good institutions on which depend the liberty
and security of the king; of these the first is the parliament and its
authority, because he who founded the kingdom, knowing the ambition of
the nobility and their boldness, considered that a bit to their mouths
would be necessary to hold them in; and, on the other side, knowing the
hatred of the people, founded in fear, against the nobles, he wished to
protect them, yet he was not anxious for this to be the particular care
of the king; therefore, to take away the reproach which he would be
liable to from the nobles for favouring the people, and from the people
for favouring the nobles, he set up an arbiter, who should be one who
could beat down the great and favour the lesser without reproach to the
king. Neither could you have a better or a more prudent arrangement, or
a greater source of security to the king and kingdom. From this one can
draw another important conclusion, that princes ought to leave affairs
of reproach to the management of others, and keep those of grace in
their own hands. And further, I consider that a prince ought to cherish
the nobles, but not so as to make himself hated by the people.

It may appear, perhaps, to some who have examined the lives and deaths
of the Roman emperors that many of them would be an example contrary
to my opinion, seeing that some of them lived nobly and showed great
qualities of soul, nevertheless they have lost their empire or have been
killed by subjects who have conspired against them. Wishing, therefore,
to answer these objections, I will recall the characters of some of the
emperors, and will show that the causes of their ruin were not different
to those alleged by me; at the same time I will only submit for
consideration those things that are noteworthy to him who studies the
affairs of those times.

It seems to me sufficient to take all those emperors who succeeded to
the empire from Marcus the philosopher down to Maximinus; they were
Marcus and his son Commodus, Pertinax, Julian, Severus and his son
Antoninus Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander, and Maximinus.

There is first to note that, whereas in other principalities the
ambition of the nobles and the insolence of the people only have to be
contended with, the Roman emperors had a third difficulty in having to
put up with the cruelty and avarice of their soldiers, a matter so beset
with difficulties that it was the ruin of many; for it was a hard thing
to give satisfaction both to soldiers and people; because the people
loved peace, and for this reason they loved the unaspiring prince,
whilst the soldiers loved the warlike prince who was bold, cruel, and
rapacious, which qualities they were quite willing he should exercise
upon the people, so that they could get double pay and give vent to
their own greed and cruelty. Hence it arose that those emperors were
always overthrown who, either by birth or training, had no great
authority, and most of them, especially those who came new to the
principality, recognizing the difficulty of these two opposing humours,
were inclined to give satisfaction to the soldiers, caring little about
injuring the people. Which course was necessary, because, as princes
cannot help being hated by someone, they ought, in the first place, to
avoid being hated by every one, and when they cannot compass this, they
ought to endeavour with the utmost diligence to avoid the hatred of the
most powerful. Therefore, those emperors who through inexperience had
need of special favour adhered more readily to the soldiers than to
the people; a course which turned out advantageous to them or not,
accordingly as the prince knew how to maintain authority over them.

From these causes it arose that Marcus, Pertinax, and Alexander, being
all men of modest life, lovers of justice, enemies to cruelty, humane,
and benignant, came to a sad end except Marcus; he alone lived and died
honoured, because he had succeeded to the throne by hereditary title,
and owed nothing either to the soldiers or the people; and afterwards,
being possessed of many virtues which made him respected, he always kept
both orders in their places whilst he lived, and was neither hated nor
despised.

But Pertinax was created emperor against the wishes of the soldiers,
who, being accustomed to live licentiously under Commodus, could not
endure the honest life to which Pertinax wished to reduce them; thus,
having given cause for hatred, to which hatred there was added contempt
for his old age, he was overthrown at the very beginning of his
administration. And here it should be noted that hatred is acquired as
much by good works as by bad ones, therefore, as I said before, a prince
wishing to keep his state is very often forced to do evil; for when that
body is corrupt whom you think you have need of to maintain yourself--it
may be either the people or the soldiers or the nobles--you have to
submit to its humours and to gratify them, and then good works will do
you harm.

But let us come to Alexander, who was a man of such great goodness,
that among the other praises which are accorded him is this, that in the
fourteen years he held the empire no one was ever put to death by
him unjudged; nevertheless, being considered effeminate and a man who
allowed himself to be governed by his mother, he became despised, the
army conspired against him, and murdered him.

Turning now to the opposite characters of Commodus, Severus, Antoninus
Caracalla, and Maximinus, you will find them all cruel and rapacious-men
who, to satisfy their soldiers, did not hesitate to commit every kind of
iniquity against the people; and all, except Severus, came to a bad
end; but in Severus there was so much valour that, keeping the soldiers
friendly, although the people were oppressed by him, he reigned
successfully; for his valour made him so much admired in the sight of
the soldiers and people that the latter were kept in a way astonished
and awed and the former respectful and satisfied. And because the
actions of this man, as a new prince, were great, I wish to show
briefly that he knew well how to counterfeit the fox and the lion, which
natures, as I said above, it is necessary for a prince to imitate.

Knowing the sloth of the Emperor Julian, he persuaded the army in
Sclavonia, of which he was captain, that it would be right to go to Rome
and avenge the death of Pertinax, who had been killed by the praetorian
soldiers; and under this pretext, without appearing to aspire to the
throne, he moved the army on Rome, and reached Italy before it was known
that he had started. On his arrival at Rome, the Senate, through fear,
elected him emperor and killed Julian. After this there remained for
Severus, who wished to make himself master of the whole empire, two
difficulties; one in Asia, where Niger, head of the Asiatic army, had
caused himself to be proclaimed emperor; the other in the west where
Albinus was, who also aspired to the throne. And as he considered it
dangerous to declare himself hostile to both, he decided to attack
Niger and to deceive Albinus. To the latter he wrote that, being elected
emperor by the Senate, he was willing to share that dignity with him and
sent him the title of Caesar; and, moreover, that the Senate had made
Albinus his colleague; which things were accepted by Albinus as true.
But after Severus had conquered and killed Niger, and settled oriental
affairs, he returned to Rome and complained to the Senate that Albinus,
little recognizing the benefits that he had received from him, had
by treachery sought to murder him, and for this ingratitude he was
compelled to punish him. Afterwards he sought him out in France, and
took from him his government and life. He who will, therefore, carefully
examine the actions of this man will find him a most valiant lion and
a most cunning fox; he will find him feared and respected by every one,
and not hated by the army; and it need not be wondered at that he, a
new man, was able to hold the empire so well, because his supreme
renown always protected him from that hatred which the people might have
conceived against him for his violence.

But his son Antoninus was a most eminent man, and had very excellent
qualities, which made him admirable in the sight of the people and
acceptable to the soldiers, for he was a warlike man, most enduring
of fatigue, a despiser of all delicate food and other luxuries, which
caused him to be beloved by the armies. Nevertheless, his ferocity and
cruelties were so great and so unheard of that, after endless single
murders, he killed a large number of the people of Rome and all those of
Alexandria. He became hated by the whole world, and also feared by those
he had around him, to such an extent that he was murdered in the midst
of his army by a centurion. And here it must be noted that such-like
deaths, which are deliberately inflicted with a resolved and desperate
courage, cannot be avoided by princes, because any one who does not fear
to die can inflict them; but a prince may fear them the less because
they are very rare; he has only to be careful not to do any grave injury
to those whom he employs or has around him in the service of the state.
Antoninus had not taken this care, but had contumeliously killed a
brother of that centurion, whom also he daily threatened, yet retained
in his bodyguard; which, as it turned out, was a rash thing to do, and
proved the emperor's ruin.

But let us come to Commodus, to whom it should have been very easy to
hold the empire, for, being the son of Marcus, he had inherited it,
and he had only to follow in the footsteps of his father to please his
people and soldiers; but, being by nature cruel and brutal, he gave
himself up to amusing the soldiers and corrupting them, so that he might
indulge his rapacity upon the people; on the other hand, not maintaining
his dignity, often descending to the theatre to compete with gladiators,
and doing other vile things, little worthy of the imperial majesty, he
fell into contempt with the soldiers, and being hated by one party and
despised by the other, he was conspired against and was killed.

It remains to discuss the character of Maximinus. He was a very warlike
man, and the armies, being disgusted with the effeminacy of Alexander,
of whom I have already spoken, killed him and elected Maximinus to the
throne. This he did not possess for long, for two things made him hated
and despised; the one, his having kept sheep in Thrace, which brought
him into contempt (it being well known to all, and considered a great
indignity by every one), and the other, his having at the accession
to his dominions deferred going to Rome and taking possession of the
imperial seat; he had also gained a reputation for the utmost ferocity
by having, through his prefects in Rome and elsewhere in the empire,
practised many cruelties, so that the whole world was moved to anger
at the meanness of his birth and to fear at his barbarity. First Africa
rebelled, then the Senate with all the people of Rome, and all Italy
conspired against him, to which may be added his own army; this latter,
besieging Aquileia and meeting with difficulties in taking it, were
disgusted with his cruelties, and fearing him less when they found so
many against him, murdered him.

I do not wish to discuss Heliogabalus, Macrinus, or Julian, who, being
thoroughly contemptible, were quickly wiped out; but I will bring this
discourse to a conclusion by saying that princes in our times have this
difficulty of giving inordinate satisfaction to their soldiers in a
far less degree, because, notwithstanding one has to give them some
indulgence, that is soon done; none of these princes have armies that
are veterans in the governance and administration of provinces, as were
the armies of the Roman Empire; and whereas it was then more necessary
to give satisfaction to the soldiers than to the people, it is now more
necessary to all princes, except the Turk and the Soldan, to satisfy the
people rather the soldiers, because the people are the more powerful.

From the above I have excepted the Turk, who always keeps round him
twelve thousand infantry and fifteen thousand cavalry on which depend
the security and strength of the kingdom, and it is necessary that,
putting aside every consideration for the people, he should keep them
his friends. The kingdom of the Soldan is similar; being entirely in the
hands of soldiers, it follows again that, without regard to the people,
he must keep them his friends. But you must note that the state of the
Soldan is unlike all other principalities, for the reason that it
is like the Christian pontificate, which cannot be called either an
hereditary or a newly formed principality; because the sons of the old
prince are not the heirs, but he who is elected to that position by
those who have authority, and the sons remain only noblemen. And this
being an ancient custom, it cannot be called a new principality, because
there are none of those difficulties in it that are met with in new
ones; for although the prince is new, the constitution of the state is
old, and it is framed so as to receive him as if he were its hereditary
lord.

But returning to the subject of our discourse, I say that whoever will
consider it will acknowledge that either hatred or contempt has been
fatal to the above-named emperors, and it will be recognized also how
it happened that, a number of them acting in one way and a number
in another, only one in each way came to a happy end and the rest to
unhappy ones. Because it would have been useless and dangerous for
Pertinax and Alexander, being new princes, to imitate Marcus, who
was heir to the principality; and likewise it would have been utterly
destructive to Caracalla, Commodus, and Maximinus to have imitated
Severus, they not having sufficient valour to enable them to tread
in his footsteps. Therefore a prince, new to the principality, cannot
imitate the actions of Marcus, nor, again, is it necessary to follow
those of Severus, but he ought to take from Severus those parts which
are necessary to found his state, and from Marcus those which are proper
and glorious to keep a state that may already be stable and firm.




CHAPTER XX -- ARE FORTRESSES, AND MANY OTHER THINGS TO WHICH PRINCES
OFTEN RESORT, ADVANTAGEOUS OR HURTFUL?

1. Some princes, so as to hold securely the state, have disarmed their
subjects; others have kept their subject towns distracted by factions;
others have fostered enmities against themselves; others have laid
themselves out to gain over those whom they distrusted in the beginning
of their governments; some have built fortresses; some have overthrown
and destroyed them. And although one cannot give a final judgment on all
of these things unless one possesses the particulars of those states
in which a decision has to be made, nevertheless I will speak as
comprehensively as the matter of itself will admit.

2. There never was a new prince who has disarmed his subjects; rather
when he has found them disarmed he has always armed them, because, by
arming them, those arms become yours, those men who were distrusted
become faithful, and those who were faithful are kept so, and your
subjects become your adherents. And whereas all subjects cannot be
armed, yet when those whom you do arm are benefited, the others can be
handled more freely, and this difference in their treatment, which they
quite understand, makes the former your dependents, and the latter,
considering it to be necessary that those who have the most danger and
service should have the most reward, excuse you. But when you disarm
them, you at once offend them by showing that you distrust them, either
for cowardice or for want of loyalty, and either of these opinions
breeds hatred against you. And because you cannot remain unarmed, it
follows that you turn to mercenaries, which are of the character already
shown; even if they should be good they would not be sufficient to
defend you against powerful enemies and distrusted subjects. Therefore,
as I have said, a new prince in a new principality has always
distributed arms. Histories are full of examples. But when a prince
acquires a new state, which he adds as a province to his old one, then
it is necessary to disarm the men of that state, except those who have
been his adherents in acquiring it; and these again, with time and
opportunity, should be rendered soft and effeminate; and matters should
be managed in such a way that all the armed men in the state shall be
your own soldiers who in your old state were living near you.

3. Our forefathers, and those who were reckoned wise, were accustomed
to say that it was necessary to hold Pistoia by factions and Pisa by
fortresses; and with this idea they fostered quarrels in some of their
tributary towns so as to keep possession of them the more easily.
This may have been well enough in those times when Italy was in a way
balanced, but I do not believe that it can be accepted as a precept
for to-day, because I do not believe that factions can ever be of use;
rather it is certain that when the enemy comes upon you in divided
cities you are quickly lost, because the weakest party will always
assist the outside forces and the other will not be able to resist.
The Venetians, moved, as I believe, by the above reasons, fostered the
Guelph and Ghibelline factions in their tributary cities; and although
they never allowed them to come to bloodshed, yet they nursed these
disputes amongst them, so that the citizens, distracted by their
differences, should not unite against them. Which, as we saw, did not
afterwards turn out as expected, because, after the rout at Vaila, one
party at once took courage and seized the state. Such methods argue,
therefore, weakness in the prince, because these factions will never be
permitted in a vigorous principality; such methods for enabling one the
more easily to manage subjects are only useful in times of peace, but if
war comes this policy proves fallacious.

4. Without doubt princes become great when they overcome the
difficulties and obstacles by which they are confronted, and therefore
fortune, especially when she desires to make a new prince great, who
has a greater necessity to earn renown than an hereditary one, causes
enemies to arise and form designs against him, in order that he may have
the opportunity of overcoming them, and by them to mount higher, as by a
ladder which his enemies have raised. For this reason many consider that
a wise prince, when he has the opportunity, ought with craft to foster
some animosity against himself, so that, having crushed it, his renown
may rise higher.

5. Princes, especially new ones, have found more fidelity and assistance
in those men who in the beginning of their rule were distrusted than
among those who in the beginning were trusted. Pandolfo Petrucci, Prince
of Siena, ruled his state more by those who had been distrusted than by
others. But on this question one cannot speak generally, for it varies
so much with the individual; I will only say this, that those men who
at the commencement of a princedom have been hostile, if they are of
a description to need assistance to support themselves, can always be
gained over with the greatest ease, and they will be tightly held to
serve the prince with fidelity, inasmuch as they know it to be very
necessary for them to cancel by deeds the bad impression which he had
formed of them; and thus the prince always extracts more profit from
them than from those who, serving him in too much security, may neglect
his affairs. And since the matter demands it, I must not fail to warn a
prince, who by means of secret favours has acquired a new state, that he
must well consider the reasons which induced those to favour him who
did so; and if it be not a natural affection towards him, but only
discontent with their government, then he will only keep them friendly
with great trouble and difficulty, for it will be impossible to satisfy
them. And weighing well the reasons for this in those examples which
can be taken from ancient and modern affairs, we shall find that it is
easier for the prince to make friends of those men who were contented
under the former government, and are therefore his enemies, than of
those who, being discontented with it, were favourable to him and
encouraged him to seize it.

6. It has been a custom with princes, in order to hold their states
more securely, to build fortresses that may serve as a bridle and bit
to those who might design to work against them, and as a place of refuge
from a first attack. I praise this system because it has been made use
of formerly. Notwithstanding that, Messer Nicolo Vitelli in our times
has been seen to demolish two fortresses in Citta di Castello so that he
might keep that state; Guido Ubaldo, Duke of Urbino, on returning to
his dominion, whence he had been driven by Cesare Borgia, razed to the
foundations all the fortresses in that province, and considered that
without them it would be more difficult to lose it; the Bentivogli
returning to Bologna came to a similar decision. Fortresses, therefore,
are useful or not according to circumstances; if they do you good in one
way they injure you in another. And this question can be reasoned thus:
the prince who has more to fear from the people than from foreigners
ought to build fortresses, but he who has more to fear from foreigners
than from the people ought to leave them alone. The castle of Milan,
built by Francesco Sforza, has made, and will make, more trouble for the
house of Sforza than any other disorder in the state. For this reason
the best possible fortress is--not to be hated by the people, because,
although you may hold the fortresses, yet they will not save you if the
people hate you, for there will never be wanting foreigners to assist
a people who have taken arms against you. It has not been seen in our
times that such fortresses have been of use to any prince, unless to the
Countess of Forli,(*) when the Count Girolamo, her consort, was killed;
for by that means she was able to withstand the popular attack and wait
for assistance from Milan, and thus recover her state; and the posture
of affairs was such at that time that the foreigners could not assist
the people. But fortresses were of little value to her afterwards when
Cesare Borgia attacked her, and when the people, her enemy, were allied
with foreigners. Therefore, it would have been safer for her, both then
and before, not to have been hated by the people than to have had the
fortresses. All these things considered then, I shall praise him
who builds fortresses as well as him who does not, and I shall blame
whoever, trusting in them, cares little about being hated by the people.

     (*) Catherine Sforza, a daughter of Galeazzo Sforza and
     Lucrezia Landriani, born 1463, died 1509. It was to the
     Countess of Forli that Machiavelli was sent as envy on 1499.
     A letter from Fortunati to the countess announces the
     appointment: "I have been with the signori," wrote
     Fortunati, "to learn whom they would send and when. They
     tell me that Nicolo Machiavelli, a learned young Florentine
     noble, secretary to my Lords of the Ten, is to leave with me
     at once." Cf. "Catherine Sforza," by Count Pasolini,
     translated by P. Sylvester, 1898.




CHAPTER XXI -- HOW A PRINCE SHOULD CONDUCT HIMSELF SO AS TO GAIN RENOWN

Nothing makes a prince so much esteemed as great enterprises and setting
a fine example. We have in our time Ferdinand of Aragon, the present
King of Spain. He can almost be called a new prince, because he has
risen, by fame and glory, from being an insignificant king to be the
foremost king in Christendom; and if you will consider his deeds
you will find them all great and some of them extraordinary. In the
beginning of his reign he attacked Granada, and this enterprise was the
foundation of his dominions. He did this quietly at first and without
any fear of hindrance, for he held the minds of the barons of Castile
occupied in thinking of the war and not anticipating any innovations;
thus they did not perceive that by these means he was acquiring power
and authority over them. He was able with the money of the Church and
of the people to sustain his armies, and by that long war to lay the
foundation for the military skill which has since distinguished him.
Further, always using religion as a plea, so as to undertake greater
schemes, he devoted himself with pious cruelty to driving out and
clearing his kingdom of the Moors; nor could there be a more admirable
example, nor one more rare. Under this same cloak he assailed Africa,
he came down on Italy, he has finally attacked France; and thus his
achievements and designs have always been great, and have kept the minds
of his people in suspense and admiration and occupied with the issue of
them. And his actions have arisen in such a way, one out of the other,
that men have never been given time to work steadily against him.

Again, it much assists a prince to set unusual examples in internal
affairs, similar to those which are related of Messer Bernabo da Milano,
who, when he had the opportunity, by any one in civil life doing some
extraordinary thing, either good or bad, would take some method of
rewarding or punishing him, which would be much spoken about. And a
prince ought, above all things, always endeavour in every action to gain
for himself the reputation of being a great and remarkable man.

A prince is also respected when he is either a true friend or a
downright enemy, that is to say, when, without any reservation, he
declares himself in favour of one party against the other; which course
will always be more advantageous than standing neutral; because if two
of your powerful neighbours come to blows, they are of such a character
that, if one of them conquers, you have either to fear him or not.
In either case it will always be more advantageous for you to declare
yourself and to make war strenuously; because, in the first case, if
you do not declare yourself, you will invariably fall a prey to
the conqueror, to the pleasure and satisfaction of him who has been
conquered, and you will have no reasons to offer, nor anything to
protect or to shelter you. Because he who conquers does not want
doubtful friends who will not aid him in the time of trial; and he who
loses will not harbour you because you did not willingly, sword in hand,
court his fate.

Antiochus went into Greece, being sent for by the Aetolians to drive
out the Romans. He sent envoys to the Achaeans, who were friends of
the Romans, exhorting them to remain neutral; and on the other hand the
Romans urged them to take up arms. This question came to be discussed in
the council of the Achaeans, where the legate of Antiochus urged them to
stand neutral. To this the Roman legate answered: "As for that which has
been said, that it is better and more advantageous for your state not
to interfere in our war, nothing can be more erroneous; because by
not interfering you will be left, without favour or consideration, the
guerdon of the conqueror." Thus it will always happen that he who is not
your friend will demand your neutrality, whilst he who is your friend
will entreat you to declare yourself with arms. And irresolute princes,
to avoid present dangers, generally follow the neutral path, and are
generally ruined. But when a prince declares himself gallantly in favour
of one side, if the party with whom he allies himself conquers, although
the victor may be powerful and may have him at his mercy, yet he is
indebted to him, and there is established a bond of amity; and men are
never so shameless as to become a monument of ingratitude by oppressing
you. Victories after all are never so complete that the victor must not
show some regard, especially to justice. But if he with whom you ally
yourself loses, you may be sheltered by him, and whilst he is able he
may aid you, and you become companions on a fortune that may rise again.

In the second case, when those who fight are of such a character that
you have no anxiety as to who may conquer, so much the more is it
greater prudence to be allied, because you assist at the destruction
of one by the aid of another who, if he had been wise, would have saved
him; and conquering, as it is impossible that he should not do with your
assistance, he remains at your discretion. And here it is to be noted
that a prince ought to take care never to make an alliance with one
more powerful than himself for the purposes of attacking others, unless
necessity compels him, as is said above; because if he conquers you are
at his discretion, and princes ought to avoid as much as possible being
at the discretion of any one. The Venetians joined with France against
the Duke of Milan, and this alliance, which caused their ruin, could
have been avoided. But when it cannot be avoided, as happened to the
Florentines when the Pope and Spain sent armies to attack Lombardy, then
in such a case, for the above reasons, the prince ought to favour one of
the parties.

Never let any Government imagine that it can choose perfectly safe
courses; rather let it expect to have to take very doubtful ones,
because it is found in ordinary affairs that one never seeks to avoid
one trouble without running into another; but prudence consists in
knowing how to distinguish the character of troubles, and for choice to
take the lesser evil.

A prince ought also to show himself a patron of ability, and to honour
the proficient in every art. At the same time he should encourage his
citizens to practise their callings peaceably, both in commerce and
agriculture, and in every other following, so that the one should not be
deterred from improving his possessions for fear lest they be taken away
from him or another from opening up trade for fear of taxes; but the
prince ought to offer rewards to whoever wishes to do these things and
designs in any way to honour his city or state.

Further, he ought to entertain the people with festivals and spectacles
at convenient seasons of the year; and as every city is divided into
guilds or into societies,(*) he ought to hold such bodies in esteem, and
associate with them sometimes, and show himself an example of courtesy
and liberality; nevertheless, always maintaining the majesty of his
rank, for this he must never consent to abate in anything.

     (*) "Guilds or societies," "in arti o in tribu." "Arti" were
     craft or trade guilds, cf. Florio: "Arte . . . a whole
     company of any trade in any city or corporation town." The
     guilds of Florence are most admirably described by Mr
     Edgcumbe Staley in his work on the subject (Methuen, 1906).
     Institutions of a somewhat similar character, called
     "artel," exist in Russia to-day, cf. Sir Mackenzie Wallace's
     "Russia," ed. 1905: "The sons . . . were always during the
     working season members of an artel. In some of the larger
     towns there are artels of a much more complex kind--
     permanent associations, possessing large capital, and
     pecuniarily responsible for the acts of the individual
     members." The word "artel," despite its apparent similarity,
     has, Mr Aylmer Maude assures me, no connection with "ars" or
     "arte." Its root is that of the verb "rotisya," to bind
     oneself by an oath; and it is generally admitted to be only
     another form of "rota," which now signifies a "regimental
     company." In both words the underlying idea is that of a
     body of men united by an oath. "Tribu" were possibly gentile
     groups, united by common descent, and included individuals
     connected by marriage. Perhaps our words "sects" or "clans"
     would be most appropriate.




CHAPTER XXII -- CONCERNING THE SECRETARIES OF PRINCES

The choice of servants is of no little importance to a prince, and they
are good or not according to the discrimination of the prince. And the
first opinion which one forms of a prince, and of his understanding, is
by observing the men he has around him; and when they are capable and
faithful he may always be considered wise, because he has known how
to recognize the capable and to keep them faithful. But when they are
otherwise one cannot form a good opinion of him, for the prime error
which he made was in choosing them.

There were none who knew Messer Antonio da Venafro as the servant of
Pandolfo Petrucci, Prince of Siena, who would not consider Pandolfo to
be a very clever man in having Venafro for his servant. Because there
are three classes of intellects: one which comprehends by itself;
another which appreciates what others comprehended; and a third which
neither comprehends by itself nor by the showing of others; the first is
the most excellent, the second is good, the third is useless. Therefore,
it follows necessarily that, if Pandolfo was not in the first rank, he
was in the second, for whenever one has judgment to know good and
bad when it is said and done, although he himself may not have the
initiative, yet he can recognize the good and the bad in his servant,
and the one he can praise and the other correct; thus the servant cannot
hope to deceive him, and is kept honest.

But to enable a prince to form an opinion of his servant there is one
test which never fails; when you see the servant thinking more of his
own interests than of yours, and seeking inwardly his own profit in
everything, such a man will never make a good servant, nor will you ever
be able to trust him; because he who has the state of another in his
hands ought never to think of himself, but always of his prince, and
never pay any attention to matters in which the prince is not concerned.

On the other hand, to keep his servant honest the prince ought to study
him, honouring him, enriching him, doing him kindnesses, sharing with
him the honours and cares; and at the same time let him see that he
cannot stand alone, so that many honours may not make him desire more,
many riches make him wish for more, and that many cares may make him
dread chances. When, therefore, servants, and princes towards servants,
are thus disposed, they can trust each other, but when it is otherwise,
the end will always be disastrous for either one or the other.




CHAPTER XXIII -- HOW FLATTERERS SHOULD BE AVOIDED

I do not wish to leave out an important branch of this subject, for it
is a danger from which princes are with difficulty preserved, unless
they are very careful and discriminating. It is that of flatterers, of
whom courts are full, because men are so self-complacent in their own
affairs, and in a way so deceived in them, that they are preserved with
difficulty from this pest, and if they wish to defend themselves they
run the danger of falling into contempt. Because there is no other way
of guarding oneself from flatterers except letting men understand that
to tell you the truth does not offend you; but when every one may tell
you the truth, respect for you abates.

Therefore a wise prince ought to hold a third course by choosing the
wise men in his state, and giving to them only the liberty of speaking
the truth to him, and then only of those things of which he inquires,
and of none others; but he ought to question them upon everything, and
listen to their opinions, and afterwards form his own conclusions.
With these councillors, separately and collectively, he ought to carry
himself in such a way that each of them should know that, the more
freely he shall speak, the more he shall be preferred; outside of
these, he should listen to no one, pursue the thing resolved on, and be
steadfast in his resolutions. He who does otherwise is either overthrown
by flatterers, or is so often changed by varying opinions that he falls
into contempt.

I wish on this subject to adduce a modern example. Fra Luca, the man of
affairs to Maximilian,(*) the present emperor, speaking of his majesty,
said: He consulted with no one, yet never got his own way in anything.
This arose because of his following a practice the opposite to the
above; for the emperor is a secretive man--he does not communicate his
designs to any one, nor does he receive opinions on them. But as in
carrying them into effect they become revealed and known, they are
at once obstructed by those men whom he has around him, and he, being
pliant, is diverted from them. Hence it follows that those things he
does one day he undoes the next, and no one ever understands what he
wishes or intends to do, and no one can rely on his resolutions.

     (*) Maximilian I, born in 1459, died 1519, Emperor of the
     Holy Roman Empire. He married, first, Mary, daughter of
     Charles the Bold; after her death, Bianca Sforza; and thus
     became involved in Italian politics.

A prince, therefore, ought always to take counsel, but only when he
wishes and not when others wish; he ought rather to discourage every one
from offering advice unless he asks it; but, however, he ought to be
a constant inquirer, and afterwards a patient listener concerning the
things of which he inquired; also, on learning that any one, on any
consideration, has not told him the truth, he should let his anger be
felt.

And if there are some who think that a prince who conveys an impression
of his wisdom is not so through his own ability, but through the good
advisers that he has around him, beyond doubt they are deceived, because
this is an axiom which never fails: that a prince who is not wise
himself will never take good advice, unless by chance he has yielded his
affairs entirely to one person who happens to be a very prudent man. In
this case indeed he may be well governed, but it would not be for long,
because such a governor would in a short time take away his state from
him.

But if a prince who is not inexperienced should take counsel from more
than one he will never get united counsels, nor will he know how to
unite them. Each of the counsellors will think of his own interests, and
the prince will not know how to control them or to see through them. And
they are not to found otherwise, because men will always prove untrue
to you unless they are kept honest by constraint. Therefore it must be
inferred that good counsels, whencesoever they come, are born of
the wisdom of the prince, and not the wisdom of the prince from good
counsels.




CHAPTER XXIV -- WHY THE PRINCES OF ITALY HAVE LOST THEIR STATES

The previous suggestions, carefully observed, will enable a new prince
to appear well established, and render him at once more secure and fixed
in the state than if he had been long seated there. For the actions of
a new prince are more narrowly observed than those of an hereditary
one, and when they are seen to be able they gain more men and bind
far tighter than ancient blood; because men are attracted more by the
present than by the past, and when they find the present good they enjoy
it and seek no further; they will also make the utmost defence of a
prince if he fails them not in other things. Thus it will be a double
glory for him to have established a new principality, and adorned and
strengthened it with good laws, good arms, good allies, and with a good
example; so will it be a double disgrace to him who, born a prince,
shall lose his state by want of wisdom.

And if those seigniors are considered who have lost their states in
Italy in our times, such as the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan,
and others, there will be found in them, firstly, one common defect in
regard to arms from the causes which have been discussed at length; in
the next place, some one of them will be seen, either to have had the
people hostile, or if he has had the people friendly, he has not known
how to secure the nobles. In the absence of these defects states that
have power enough to keep an army in the field cannot be lost.

Philip of Macedon, not the father of Alexander the Great, but he who
was conquered by Titus Quintius, had not much territory compared to
the greatness of the Romans and of Greece who attacked him, yet being a
warlike man who knew how to attract the people and secure the nobles, he
sustained the war against his enemies for many years, and if in the
end he lost the dominion of some cities, nevertheless he retained the
kingdom.

Therefore, do not let our princes accuse fortune for the loss of their
principalities after so many years' possession, but rather their own
sloth, because in quiet times they never thought there could be a change
(it is a common defect in man not to make any provision in the calm
against the tempest), and when afterwards the bad times came they
thought of flight and not of defending themselves, and they hoped that
the people, disgusted with the insolence of the conquerors, would recall
them. This course, when others fail, may be good, but it is very bad to
have neglected all other expedients for that, since you would never
wish to fall because you trusted to be able to find someone later on to
restore you. This again either does not happen, or, if it does, it will
not be for your security, because that deliverance is of no avail which
does not depend upon yourself; those only are reliable, certain, and
durable that depend on yourself and your valour.




CHAPTER XXV -- WHAT FORTUNE CAN EFFECT IN HUMAN AFFAIRS AND HOW TO
WITHSTAND HER

It is not unknown to me how many men have had, and still have, the
opinion that the affairs of the world are in such wise governed by
fortune and by God that men with their wisdom cannot direct them and
that no one can even help them; and because of this they would have us
believe that it is not necessary to labour much in affairs, but to let
chance govern them. This opinion has been more credited in our times
because of the great changes in affairs which have been seen, and
may still be seen, every day, beyond all human conjecture. Sometimes
pondering over this, I am in some degree inclined to their opinion.
Nevertheless, not to extinguish our free will, I hold it to be true that
Fortune is the arbiter of one-half of our actions,(*) but that she still
leaves us to direct the other half, or perhaps a little less.

     (*) Frederick the Great was accustomed to say: "The older
     one gets the more convinced one becomes that his Majesty
     King Chance does three-quarters of the business of this
     miserable universe." Sorel's "Eastern Question."

I compare her to one of those raging rivers, which when in flood
overflows the plains, sweeping away trees and buildings, bearing away
the soil from place to place; everything flies before it, all yield to
its violence, without being able in any way to withstand it; and yet,
though its nature be such, it does not follow therefore that men, when
the weather becomes fair, shall not make provision, both with defences
and barriers, in such a manner that, rising again, the waters may
pass away by canal, and their force be neither so unrestrained nor so
dangerous. So it happens with fortune, who shows her power where valour
has not prepared to resist her, and thither she turns her forces where
she knows that barriers and defences have not been raised to constrain
her.

And if you will consider Italy, which is the seat of these changes, and
which has given to them their impulse, you will see it to be an open
country without barriers and without any defence. For if it had been
defended by proper valour, as are Germany, Spain, and France, either
this invasion would not have made the great changes it has made or it
would not have come at all. And this I consider enough to say concerning
resistance to fortune in general.

But confining myself more to the particular, I say that a prince may be
seen happy to-day and ruined to-morrow without having shown any change
of disposition or character. This, I believe, arises firstly from causes
that have already been discussed at length, namely, that the prince who
relies entirely on fortune is lost when it changes. I believe also that
he will be successful who directs his actions according to the spirit of
the times, and that he whose actions do not accord with the times will
not be successful. Because men are seen, in affairs that lead to the end
which every man has before him, namely, glory and riches, to get there
by various methods; one with caution, another with haste; one by force,
another by skill; one by patience, another by its opposite; and each one
succeeds in reaching the goal by a different method. One can also see of
two cautious men the one attain his end, the other fail; and similarly,
two men by different observances are equally successful, the one being
cautious, the other impetuous; all this arises from nothing else than
whether or not they conform in their methods to the spirit of the times.
This follows from what I have said, that two men working differently
bring about the same effect, and of two working similarly, one attains
his object and the other does not.

Changes in estate also issue from this, for if, to one who governs
himself with caution and patience, times and affairs converge in such a
way that his administration is successful, his fortune is made; but if
times and affairs change, he is ruined if he does not change his course
of action. But a man is not often found sufficiently circumspect to know
how to accommodate himself to the change, both because he cannot deviate
from what nature inclines him to do, and also because, having always
prospered by acting in one way, he cannot be persuaded that it is well
to leave it; and, therefore, the cautious man, when it is time to turn
adventurous, does not know how to do it, hence he is ruined; but had he
changed his conduct with the times fortune would not have changed.

Pope Julius the Second went to work impetuously in all his affairs, and
found the times and circumstances conform so well to that line of action
that he always met with success. Consider his first enterprise against
Bologna, Messer Giovanni Bentivogli being still alive. The Venetians
were not agreeable to it, nor was the King of Spain, and he had the
enterprise still under discussion with the King of France; nevertheless
he personally entered upon the expedition with his accustomed boldness
and energy, a move which made Spain and the Venetians stand irresolute
and passive, the latter from fear, the former from desire to recover
the kingdom of Naples; on the other hand, he drew after him the King of
France, because that king, having observed the movement, and desiring
to make the Pope his friend so as to humble the Venetians, found it
impossible to refuse him. Therefore Julius with his impetuous action
accomplished what no other pontiff with simple human wisdom could have
done; for if he had waited in Rome until he could get away, with his
plans arranged and everything fixed, as any other pontiff would have
done, he would never have succeeded. Because the King of France would
have made a thousand excuses, and the others would have raised a
thousand fears.

I will leave his other actions alone, as they were all alike, and they
all succeeded, for the shortness of his life did not let him experience
the contrary; but if circumstances had arisen which required him to go
cautiously, his ruin would have followed, because he would never have
deviated from those ways to which nature inclined him.

I conclude, therefore that, fortune being changeful and mankind
steadfast in their ways, so long as the two are in agreement men are
successful, but unsuccessful when they fall out. For my part I consider
that it is better to be adventurous than cautious, because fortune is
a woman, and if you wish to keep her under it is necessary to beat and
ill-use her; and it is seen that she allows herself to be mastered by
the adventurous rather than by those who go to work more coldly. She is,
therefore, always, woman-like, a lover of young men, because they are
less cautious, more violent, and with more audacity command her.




CHAPTER XXVI -- AN EXHORTATION TO LIBERATE ITALY FROM THE BARBARIANS

Having carefully considered the subject of the above discourses, and
wondering within myself whether the present times were propitious to
a new prince, and whether there were elements that would give an
opportunity to a wise and virtuous one to introduce a new order of
things which would do honour to him and good to the people of this
country, it appears to me that so many things concur to favour a new
prince that I never knew a time more fit than the present.

And if, as I said, it was necessary that the people of Israel should be
captive so as to make manifest the ability of Moses; that the Persians
should be oppressed by the Medes so as to discover the greatness of the
soul of Cyrus; and that the Athenians should be dispersed to illustrate
the capabilities of Theseus: then at the present time, in order to
discover the virtue of an Italian spirit, it was necessary that Italy
should be reduced to the extremity that she is now in, that she should
be more enslaved than the Hebrews, more oppressed than the Persians,
more scattered than the Athenians; without head, without order, beaten,
despoiled, torn, overrun; and to have endured every kind of desolation.

Although lately some spark may have been shown by one, which made us
think he was ordained by God for our redemption, nevertheless it was
afterwards seen, in the height of his career, that fortune rejected him;
so that Italy, left as without life, waits for him who shall yet heal
her wounds and put an end to the ravaging and plundering of Lombardy,
to the swindling and taxing of the kingdom and of Tuscany, and cleanse
those sores that for long have festered. It is seen how she entreats God
to send someone who shall deliver her from these wrongs and barbarous
insolencies. It is seen also that she is ready and willing to follow a
banner if only someone will raise it.

Nor is there to be seen at present one in whom she can place more hope
than in your illustrious house,(*) with its valour and fortune, favoured
by God and by the Church of which it is now the chief, and which could
be made the head of this redemption. This will not be difficult if you
will recall to yourself the actions and lives of the men I have named.
And although they were great and wonderful men, yet they were men, and
each one of them had no more opportunity than the present offers, for
their enterprises were neither more just nor easier than this, nor was
God more their friend than He is yours.

     (*) Giuliano de Medici. He had just been created a cardinal
     by Leo X. In 1523 Giuliano was elected Pope, and took the
     title of Clement VII.

With us there is great justice, because that war is just which is
necessary, and arms are hallowed when there is no other hope but in
them. Here there is the greatest willingness, and where the willingness
is great the difficulties cannot be great if you will only follow those
men to whom I have directed your attention. Further than this, how
extraordinarily the ways of God have been manifested beyond example:
the sea is divided, a cloud has led the way, the rock has poured
forth water, it has rained manna, everything has contributed to
your greatness; you ought to do the rest. God is not willing to do
everything, and thus take away our free will and that share of glory
which belongs to us.

And it is not to be wondered at if none of the above-named Italians
have been able to accomplish all that is expected from your illustrious
house; and if in so many revolutions in Italy, and in so many campaigns,
it has always appeared as if military virtue were exhausted, this has
happened because the old order of things was not good, and none of us
have known how to find a new one. And nothing honours a man more than to
establish new laws and new ordinances when he himself was newly risen.
Such things when they are well founded and dignified will make him
revered and admired, and in Italy there are not wanting opportunities to
bring such into use in every form.

Here there is great valour in the limbs whilst it fails in the head.
Look attentively at the duels and the hand-to-hand combats, how superior
the Italians are in strength, dexterity, and subtlety. But when it comes
to armies they do not bear comparison, and this springs entirely from
the insufficiency of the leaders, since those who are capable are not
obedient, and each one seems to himself to know, there having never been
any one so distinguished above the rest, either by valour or fortune,
that others would yield to him. Hence it is that for so long a time,
and during so much fighting in the past twenty years, whenever there
has been an army wholly Italian, it has always given a poor account of
itself; the first witness to this is Il Taro, afterwards Allesandria,
Capua, Genoa, Vaila, Bologna, Mestri.(*)

     (*) The battles of Il Taro, 1495; Alessandria, 1499; Capua,
     1501; Genoa, 1507; Vaila, 1509; Bologna, 1511; Mestri, 1513.

If, therefore, your illustrious house wishes to follow these remarkable
men who have redeemed their country, it is necessary before all things,
as a true foundation for every enterprise, to be provided with your
own forces, because there can be no more faithful, truer, or better
soldiers. And although singly they are good, altogether they will
be much better when they find themselves commanded by their prince,
honoured by him, and maintained at his expense. Therefore it is
necessary to be prepared with such arms, so that you can be defended
against foreigners by Italian valour.

And although Swiss and Spanish infantry may be considered very
formidable, nevertheless there is a defect in both, by reason of which
a third order would not only be able to oppose them, but might be relied
upon to overthrow them. For the Spaniards cannot resist cavalry, and the
Switzers are afraid of infantry whenever they encounter them in close
combat. Owing to this, as has been and may again be seen, the Spaniards
are unable to resist French cavalry, and the Switzers are overthrown by
Spanish infantry. And although a complete proof of this latter cannot
be shown, nevertheless there was some evidence of it at the battle of
Ravenna, when the Spanish infantry were confronted by German battalions,
who follow the same tactics as the Swiss; when the Spaniards, by agility
of body and with the aid of their shields, got in under the pikes of the
Germans and stood out of danger, able to attack, while the Germans stood
helpless, and, if the cavalry had not dashed up, all would have been
over with them. It is possible, therefore, knowing the defects of both
these infantries, to invent a new one, which will resist cavalry and not
be afraid of infantry; this need not create a new order of arms, but
a variation upon the old. And these are the kind of improvements which
confer reputation and power upon a new prince.

This opportunity, therefore, ought not to be allowed to pass for letting
Italy at last see her liberator appear. Nor can one express the love
with which he would be received in all those provinces which have
suffered so much from these foreign scourings, with what thirst for
revenge, with what stubborn faith, with what devotion, with what tears.
What door would be closed to him? Who would refuse obedience to him?
What envy would hinder him? What Italian would refuse him homage? To all
of us this barbarous dominion stinks. Let, therefore, your illustrious
house take up this charge with that courage and hope with which all
just enterprises are undertaken, so that under its standard our native
country may be ennobled, and under its auspices may be verified that
saying of Petrarch:

     Virtu contro al Furore
     Prendera l'arme, e fia il combatter corto:
     Che l'antico valore
     Negli italici cuor non e ancor morto.

     Virtue against fury shall advance the fight,
     And it i' th' combat soon shall put to flight:
     For the old Roman valour is not dead,
     Nor in th' Italians' brests extinguished.

     Edward Dacre, 1640.




DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODS ADOPTED BY THE DUKE VALENTINO WHEN MURDERING
VITELLOZZO VITELLI, OLIVEROTTO DA FERMO, THE SIGNOR PAGOLO, AND THE DUKE
DI GRAVINA ORSINI

BY

NICOLO MACHIAVELLI


The Duke Valentino had returned from Lombardy, where he had been to
clear himself with the King of France from the calumnies which had been
raised against him by the Florentines concerning the rebellion of Arezzo
and other towns in the Val di Chiana, and had arrived at Imola, whence
he intended with his army to enter upon the campaign against Giovanni
Bentivogli, the tyrant of Bologna: for he intended to bring that city
under his domination, and to make it the head of his Romagnian duchy.

These matters coming to the knowledge of the Vitelli and Orsini and
their following, it appeared to them that the duke would become too
powerful, and it was feared that, having seized Bologna, he would seek
to destroy them in order that he might become supreme in Italy. Upon
this a meeting was called at Magione in the district of Perugia,
to which came the cardinal, Pagolo, and the Duke di Gravina Orsini,
Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto da Fermo, Gianpagolo Baglioni, the tyrant
of Perugia, and Messer Antonio da Venafro, sent by Pandolfo Petrucci,
the Prince of Siena. Here were discussed the power and courage of the
duke and the necessity of curbing his ambitions, which might otherwise
bring danger to the rest of being ruined. And they decided not to
abandon the Bentivogli, but to strive to win over the Florentines; and
they send their men to one place and another, promising to one party
assistance and to another encouragement to unite with them against the
common enemy. This meeting was at once reported throughout all Italy,
and those who were discontented under the duke, among whom were the
people of Urbino, took hope of effecting a revolution.

Thus it arose that, men's minds being thus unsettled, it was decided by
certain men of Urbino to seize the fortress of San Leo, which was
held for the duke, and which they captured by the following means. The
castellan was fortifying the rock and causing timber to be taken there;
so the conspirators watched, and when certain beams which were being
carried to the rock were upon the bridge, so that it was prevented from
being drawn up by those inside, they took the opportunity of leaping
upon the bridge and thence into the fortress. Upon this capture being
effected, the whole state rebelled and recalled the old duke, being
encouraged in this, not so much by the capture of the fort, as by the
Diet at Magione, from whom they expected to get assistance.

Those who heard of the rebellion at Urbino thought they would not lose
the opportunity, and at once assembled their men so as to take any town,
should any remain in the hands of the duke in that state; and they sent
again to Florence to beg that republic to join with them in destroying
the common firebrand, showing that the risk was lessened and that they
ought not to wait for another opportunity.

But the Florentines, from hatred, for sundry reasons, of the Vitelli and
Orsini, not only would not ally themselves, but sent Nicolo Machiavelli,
their secretary, to offer shelter and assistance to the duke against
his enemies. The duke was found full of fear at Imola, because, against
everybody's expectation, his soldiers had at once gone over to the
enemy and he found himself disarmed and war at his door. But recovering
courage from the offers of the Florentines, he decided to temporize
before fighting with the few soldiers that remained to him, and to
negotiate for a reconciliation, and also to get assistance. This latter
he obtained in two ways, by sending to the King of France for men and by
enlisting men-at-arms and others whom he turned into cavalry of a sort:
to all he gave money.

Notwithstanding this, his enemies drew near to him, and approached
Fossombrone, where they encountered some men of the duke and, with the
aid of the Orsini and Vitelli, routed them. When this happened, the duke
resolved at once to see if he could not close the trouble with offers of
reconciliation, and being a most perfect dissembler he did not fail in
any practices to make the insurgents understand that he wished every man
who had acquired anything to keep it, as it was enough for him to have
the title of prince, whilst others might have the principality.

And the duke succeeded so well in this that they sent Signor Pagolo to
him to negotiate for a reconciliation, and they brought their army to a
standstill. But the duke did not stop his preparations, and took
every care to provide himself with cavalry and infantry, and that such
preparations might not be apparent to the others, he sent his troops in
separate parties to every part of the Romagna. In the meanwhile there
came also to him five hundred French lancers, and although he found
himself sufficiently strong to take vengeance on his enemies in open
war, he considered that it would be safer and more advantageous
to outwit them, and for this reason he did not stop the work of
reconciliation.

And that this might be effected the duke concluded a peace with them in
which he confirmed their former covenants; he gave them four thousand
ducats at once; he promised not to injure the Bentivogli; and he formed
an alliance with Giovanni; and moreover he would not force them to come
personally into his presence unless it pleased them to do so. On the
other hand, they promised to restore to him the duchy of Urbino and
other places seized by them, to serve him in all his expeditions, and
not to make war against or ally themselves with any one without his
permission.

This reconciliation being completed, Guido Ubaldo, the Duke of Urbino,
again fled to Venice, having first destroyed all the fortresses in
his state; because, trusting in the people, he did not wish that the
fortresses, which he did not think he could defend, should be held by
the enemy, since by these means a check would be kept upon his friends.
But the Duke Valentino, having completed this convention, and dispersed
his men throughout the Romagna, set out for Imola at the end of November
together with his French men-at-arms: thence he went to Cesena, where he
stayed some time to negotiate with the envoys of the Vitelli and Orsini,
who had assembled with their men in the duchy of Urbino, as to the
enterprise in which they should now take part; but nothing being
concluded, Oliverotto da Fermo was sent to propose that if the duke
wished to undertake an expedition against Tuscany they were ready; if
he did not wish it, then they would besiege Sinigalia. To this the duke
replied that he did not wish to enter into war with Tuscany, and thus
become hostile to the Florentines, but that he was very willing to
proceed against Sinigalia.

It happened that not long afterwards the town surrendered, but the
fortress would not yield to them because the castellan would not give
it up to any one but the duke in person; therefore they exhorted him
to come there. This appeared a good opportunity to the duke, as, being
invited by them, and not going of his own will, he would awaken no
suspicions. And the more to reassure them, he allowed all the French
men-at-arms who were with him in Lombardy to depart, except the hundred
lancers under Mons. di Candales, his brother-in-law. He left Cesena
about the middle of December, and went to Fano, and with the utmost
cunning and cleverness he persuaded the Vitelli and Orsini to wait for
him at Sinigalia, pointing out to them that any lack of compliance would
cast a doubt upon the sincerity and permanency of the reconciliation,
and that he was a man who wished to make use of the arms and councils of
his friends. But Vitellozzo remained very stubborn, for the death of
his brother warned him that he should not offend a prince and afterwards
trust him; nevertheless, persuaded by Pagolo Orsini, whom the duke had
corrupted with gifts and promises, he agreed to wait.

Upon this the duke, before his departure from Fano, which was to be
on 30th December 1502, communicated his designs to eight of his most
trusted followers, among whom were Don Michele and the Monsignor d'Euna,
who was afterwards cardinal; and he ordered that, as soon as Vitellozzo,
Pagolo Orsini, the Duke di Gravina, and Oliverotto should arrive, his
followers in pairs should take them one by one, entrusting certain
men to certain pairs, who should entertain them until they reached
Sinigalia; nor should they be permitted to leave until they came to the
duke's quarters, where they should be seized.

The duke afterwards ordered all his horsemen and infantry, of which
there were more than two thousand cavalry and ten thousand footmen, to
assemble by daybreak at the Metauro, a river five miles distant from
Fano, and await him there. He found himself, therefore, on the last day
of December at the Metauro with his men, and having sent a cavalcade
of about two hundred horsemen before him, he then moved forward the
infantry, whom he accompanied with the rest of the men-at-arms.

Fano and Sinigalia are two cities of La Marca situate on the shore of
the Adriatic Sea, fifteen miles distant from each other, so that he who
goes towards Sinigalia has the mountains on his right hand, the bases
of which are touched by the sea in some places. The city of Sinigalia is
distant from the foot of the mountains a little more than a bow-shot
and from the shore about a mile. On the side opposite to the city runs
a little river which bathes that part of the walls looking towards Fano,
facing the high road. Thus he who draws near to Sinigalia comes for
a good space by road along the mountains, and reaches the river which
passes by Sinigalia. If he turns to his left hand along the bank of it,
and goes for the distance of a bow-shot, he arrives at a bridge which
crosses the river; he is then almost abreast of the gate that leads into
Sinigalia, not by a straight line, but transversely. Before this gate
there stands a collection of houses with a square to which the bank of
the river forms one side.

The Vitelli and Orsini having received orders to wait for the duke, and
to honour him in person, sent away their men to several castles distant
from Sinigalia about six miles, so that room could be made for the men
of the duke; and they left in Sinigalia only Oliverotto and his band,
which consisted of one thousand infantry and one hundred and fifty
horsemen, who were quartered in the suburb mentioned above. Matters
having been thus arranged, the Duke Valentino left for Sinigalia, and
when the leaders of the cavalry reached the bridge they did not pass
over, but having opened it, one portion wheeled towards the river and
the other towards the country, and a way was left in the middle through
which the infantry passed, without stopping, into the town.

Vitellozzo, Pagolo, and the Duke di Gravina on mules, accompanied by a
few horsemen, went towards the duke; Vitellozo, unarmed and wearing a
cape lined with green, appeared very dejected, as if conscious of his
approaching death--a circumstance which, in view of the ability of the
man and his former fortune, caused some amazement. And it is said that
when he parted from his men before setting out for Sinigalia to meet the
duke he acted as if it were his last parting from them. He recommended
his house and its fortunes to his captains, and advised his nephews that
it was not the fortune of their house, but the virtues of their fathers
that should be kept in mind. These three, therefore, came before
the duke and saluted him respectfully, and were received by him with
goodwill; they were at once placed between those who were commissioned
to look after them.

But the duke noticing that Oliverotto, who had remained with his band in
Sinigalia, was missing--for Oliverotto was waiting in the square before
his quarters near the river, keeping his men in order and drilling
them--signalled with his eye to Don Michelle, to whom the care of
Oliverotto had been committed, that he should take measures that
Oliverotto should not escape. Therefore Don Michele rode off and joined
Oliverotto, telling him that it was not right to keep his men out of
their quarters, because these might be taken up by the men of the duke;
and he advised him to send them at once to their quarters and to come
himself to meet the duke. And Oliverotto, having taken this advice, came
before the duke, who, when he saw him, called to him; and Oliverotto,
having made his obeisance, joined the others.

So the whole party entered Sinigalia, dismounted at the duke's quarters,
and went with him into a secret chamber, where the duke made them
prisoners; he then mounted on horseback, and issued orders that the men
of Oliverotto and the Orsini should be stripped of their arms. Those of
Oliverotto, being at hand, were quickly settled, but those of the Orsini
and Vitelli, being at a distance, and having a presentiment of the
destruction of their masters, had time to prepare themselves, and
bearing in mind the valour and discipline of the Orsinian and Vitellian
houses, they stood together against the hostile forces of the country
and saved themselves.

But the duke's soldiers, not being content with having pillaged the
men of Oliverotto, began to sack Sinigalia, and if the duke had
not repressed this outrage by killing some of them they would have
completely sacked it. Night having come and the tumult being silenced,
the duke prepared to kill Vitellozzo and Oliverotto; he led them into
a room and caused them to be strangled. Neither of them used words in
keeping with their past lives: Vitellozzo prayed that he might ask of
the pope full pardon for his sins; Oliverotto cringed and laid the blame
for all injuries against the duke on Vitellozzo. Pagolo and the Duke di
Gravina Orsini were kept alive until the duke heard from Rome that the
pope had taken the Cardinal Orsino, the Archbishop of Florence, and
Messer Jacopo da Santa Croce. After which news, on 18th January 1502, in
the castle of Pieve, they also were strangled in the same way.





THE LIFE OF CASTRUCCIO CASTRACANI OF LUCCA

WRITTEN BY NICOLO MACHIAVELLI

And sent to his friends ZANOBI BUONDELMONTI And LUIGI ALAMANNI


CASTRUCCIO CASTRACANI 1284-1328

It appears, dearest Zanobi and Luigi, a wonderful thing to those who
have considered the matter, that all men, or the larger number of them,
who have performed great deeds in the world, and excelled all others in
their day, have had their birth and beginning in baseness and obscurity;
or have been aggrieved by Fortune in some outrageous way. They have
either been exposed to the mercy of wild beasts, or they have had so
mean a parentage that in shame they have given themselves out to be
sons of Jove or of some other deity. It would be wearisome to relate who
these persons may have been because they are well known to everybody,
and, as such tales would not be particularly edifying to those who read
them, they are omitted. I believe that these lowly beginnings of great
men occur because Fortune is desirous of showing to the world that such
men owe much to her and little to wisdom, because she begins to show
her hand when wisdom can really take no part in their career: thus all
success must be attributed to her. Castruccio Castracani of Lucca was
one of those men who did great deeds, if he is measured by the times in
which he lived and the city in which he was born; but, like many others,
he was neither fortunate nor distinguished in his birth, as the course
of this history will show. It appeared to be desirable to recall his
memory, because I have discerned in him such indications of valour and
fortune as should make him a great exemplar to men. I think also that
I ought to call your attention to his actions, because you of all men I
know delight most in noble deeds.

The family of Castracani was formerly numbered among the noble families
of Lucca, but in the days of which I speak it had somewhat fallen in
estate, as so often happens in this world. To this family was born a son
Antonio, who became a priest of the order of San Michele of Lucca, and
for this reason was honoured with the title of Messer Antonio. He had an
only sister, who had been married to Buonaccorso Cenami, but Buonaccorso
dying she became a widow, and not wishing to marry again went to live
with her brother. Messer Antonio had a vineyard behind the house where
he resided, and as it was bounded on all sides by gardens, any person
could have access to it without difficulty. One morning, shortly after
sunrise, Madonna Dianora, as the sister of Messer Antonio was called,
had occasion to go into the vineyard as usual to gather herbs for
seasoning the dinner, and hearing a slight rustling among the leaves
of a vine she turned her eyes in that direction, and heard something
resembling the cry of an infant. Whereupon she went towards it, and saw
the hands and face of a baby who was lying enveloped in the leaves and
who seemed to be crying for its mother. Partly wondering and partly
fearing, yet full of compassion, she lifted it up and carried it to
the house, where she washed it and clothed it with clean linen as is
customary, and showed it to Messer Antonio when he returned home. When
he heard what had happened and saw the child he was not less surprised
or compassionate than his sister. They discussed between themselves
what should be done, and seeing that he was priest and that she had no
children, they finally determined to bring it up. They had a nurse for
it, and it was reared and loved as if it were their own child. They
baptized it, and gave it the name of Castruccio after their father. As
the years passed Castruccio grew very handsome, and gave evidence of
wit and discretion, and learnt with a quickness beyond his years those
lessons which Messer Antonio imparted to him. Messer Antonio intended
to make a priest of him, and in time would have inducted him into his
canonry and other benefices, and all his instruction was given with
this object; but Antonio discovered that the character of Castruccio was
quite unfitted for the priesthood. As soon as Castruccio reached the
age of fourteen he began to take less notice of the chiding of Messer
Antonio and Madonna Dianora and no longer to fear them; he left
off reading ecclesiastical books, and turned to playing with arms,
delighting in nothing so much as in learning their uses, and in running,
leaping, and wrestling with other boys. In all exercises he far excelled
his companions in courage and bodily strength, and if at any time he did
turn to books, only those pleased him which told of wars and the mighty
deeds of men. Messer Antonio beheld all this with vexation and sorrow.

There lived in the city of Lucca a gentleman of the Guinigi family,
named Messer Francesco, whose profession was arms and who in riches,
bodily strength, and valour excelled all other men in Lucca. He had
often fought under the command of the Visconti of Milan, and as a
Ghibelline was the valued leader of that party in Lucca. This gentleman
resided in Lucca and was accustomed to assemble with others most
mornings and evenings under the balcony of the Podesta, which is at the
top of the square of San Michele, the finest square in Lucca, and he had
often seen Castruccio taking part with other children of the street
in those games of which I have spoken. Noticing that Castruccio far
excelled the other boys, and that he appeared to exercise a royal
authority over them, and that they loved and obeyed him, Messer
Francesco became greatly desirous of learning who he was. Being informed
of the circumstances of the bringing up of Castruccio he felt a greater
desire to have him near to him. Therefore he called him one day and
asked him whether he would more willingly live in the house of a
gentleman, where he would learn to ride horses and use arms, or in
the house of a priest, where he would learn nothing but masses and
the services of the Church. Messer Francesco could see that it pleased
Castruccio greatly to hear horses and arms spoken of, even though
he stood silent, blushing modestly; but being encouraged by Messer
Francesco to speak, he answered that, if his master were agreeable,
nothing would please him more than to give up his priestly studies and
take up those of a soldier. This reply delighted Messer Francesco, and
in a very short time he obtained the consent of Messer Antonio, who was
driven to yield by his knowledge of the nature of the lad, and the fear
that he would not be able to hold him much longer.

Thus Castruccio passed from the house of Messer Antonio the priest
to the house of Messer Francesco Guinigi the soldier, and it was
astonishing to find that in a very short time he manifested all that
virtue and bearing which we are accustomed to associate with a true
gentleman. In the first place he became an accomplished horseman, and
could manage with ease the most fiery charger, and in all jousts and
tournaments, although still a youth, he was observed beyond all others,
and he excelled in all exercises of strength and dexterity. But what
enhanced so much the charm of these accomplishments, was the delightful
modesty which enabled him to avoid offence in either act or word to
others, for he was deferential to the great men, modest with his equals,
and courteous to his inferiors. These gifts made him beloved, not only
by all the Guinigi family, but by all Lucca. When Castruccio had reached
his eighteenth year, the Ghibellines were driven from Pavia by the
Guelphs, and Messer Francesco was sent by the Visconti to assist the
Ghibellines, and with him went Castruccio, in charge of his forces.
Castruccio gave ample proof of his prudence and courage in this
expedition, acquiring greater reputation than any other captain, and
his name and fame were known, not only in Pavia, but throughout all
Lombardy.

Castruccio, having returned to Lucca in far higher estimation that he
left it, did not omit to use all the means in his power to gain as many
friends as he could, neglecting none of those arts which are necessary
for that purpose. About this time Messer Francesco died, leaving a son
thirteen years of age named Pagolo, and having appointed Castruccio
to be his son's tutor and administrator of his estate. Before he died
Francesco called Castruccio to him, and prayed him to show Pagolo that
goodwill which he (Francesco) had always shown to HIM, and to render to
the son the gratitude which he had not been able to repay to the father.
Upon the death of Francesco, Castruccio became the governor and tutor of
Pagolo, which increased enormously his power and position, and created
a certain amount of envy against him in Lucca in place of the former
universal goodwill, for many men suspected him of harbouring tyrannical
intentions. Among these the leading man was Giorgio degli Opizi, the
head of the Guelph party. This man hoped after the death of Messer
Francesco to become the chief man in Lucca, but it seemed to him that
Castruccio, with the great abilities which he already showed, and
holding the position of governor, deprived him of his opportunity;
therefore he began to sow those seeds which should rob Castruccio of his
eminence. Castruccio at first treated this with scorn, but afterwards
he grew alarmed, thinking that Messer Giorgio might be able to bring
him into disgrace with the deputy of King Ruberto of Naples and have him
driven out of Lucca.

The Lord of Pisa at that time was Uguccione of the Faggiuola of Arezzo,
who being in the first place elected their captain afterwards became
their lord. There resided in Paris some exiled Ghibellines from Lucca,
with whom Castruccio held communications with the object of effecting
their restoration by the help of Uguccione. Castruccio also brought into
his plans friends from Lucca who would not endure the authority of the
Opizi. Having fixed upon a plan to be followed, Castruccio cautiously
fortified the tower of the Onesti, filling it with supplies and
munitions of war, in order that it might stand a siege for a few days
in case of need. When the night came which had been agreed upon with
Uguccione, who had occupied the plain between the mountains and
Pisa with many men, the signal was given, and without being observed
Uguccione approached the gate of San Piero and set fire to the
portcullis. Castruccio raised a great uproar within the city, calling
the people to arms and forcing open the gate from his side. Uguccione
entered with his men, poured through the town, and killed Messer Giorgio
with all his family and many of his friends and supporters. The governor
was driven out, and the government reformed according to the wishes of
Uguccione, to the detriment of the city, because it was found that more
than one hundred families were exiled at that time. Of those who
fled, part went to Florence and part to Pistoia, which city was the
headquarters of the Guelph party, and for this reason it became most
hostile to Uguccione and the Lucchese.

As it now appeared to the Florentines and others of the Guelph party
that the Ghibellines absorbed too much power in Tuscany, they determined
to restore the exiled Guelphs to Lucca. They assembled a large army in
the Val di Nievole, and seized Montecatini; from thence they marched to
Montecarlo, in order to secure the free passage into Lucca. Upon this
Uguccione assembled his Pisan and Lucchese forces, and with a number
of German cavalry which he drew out of Lombardy, he moved against
the quarters of the Florentines, who upon the appearance of the enemy
withdrew from Montecarlo, and posted themselves between Montecatini and
Pescia. Uguccione now took up a position near to Montecarlo, and within
about two miles of the enemy, and slight skirmishes between the horse
of both parties were of daily occurrence. Owing to the illness of
Uguccione, the Pisans and Lucchese delayed coming to battle with the
enemy. Uguccione, finding himself growing worse, went to Montecarlo to
be cured, and left the command of the army in the hands of Castruccio.
This change brought about the ruin of the Guelphs, who, thinking
that the hostile army having lost its captain had lost its head, grew
over-confident. Castruccio observed this, and allowed some days to pass
in order to encourage this belief; he also showed signs of fear, and
did not allow any of the munitions of the camp to be used. On the other
side, the Guelphs grew more insolent the more they saw these evidences
of fear, and every day they drew out in the order of battle in front
of the army of Castruccio. Presently, deeming that the enemy was
sufficiently emboldened, and having mastered their tactics, he decided
to join battle with them. First he spoke a few words of encouragement to
his soldiers, and pointed out to them the certainty of victory if they
would but obey his commands. Castruccio had noticed how the enemy had
placed all his best troops in the centre of the line of battle, and his
less reliable men on the wings of the army; whereupon he did exactly
the opposite, putting his most valiant men on the flanks, while those
on whom he could not so strongly rely he moved to the centre. Observing
this order of battle, he drew out of his lines and quickly came in sight
of the hostile army, who, as usual, had come in their insolence to defy
him. He then commanded his centre squadrons to march slowly, whilst
he moved rapidly forward those on the wings. Thus, when they came into
contact with the enemy, only the wings of the two armies became engaged,
whilst the center battalions remained out of action, for these two
portions of the line of battle were separated from each other by a long
interval and thus unable to reach each other. By this expedient the more
valiant part of Castruccio's men were opposed to the weaker part of the
enemy's troops, and the most efficient men of the enemy were disengaged;
and thus the Florentines were unable to fight with those who were
arrayed opposite to them, or to give any assistance to their own flanks.
So, without much difficulty, Castruccio put the enemy to flight on
both flanks, and the centre battalions took to flight when they found
themselves exposed to attack, without having a chance of displaying
their valour. The defeat was complete, and the loss in men very heavy,
there being more than ten thousand men killed with many officers and
knights of the Guelph party in Tuscany, and also many princes who had
come to help them, among whom were Piero, the brother of King Ruberto,
and Carlo, his nephew, and Filippo, the lord of Taranto. On the part of
Castruccio the loss did not amount to more than three hundred men, among
whom was Francesco, the son of Uguccione, who, being young and rash, was
killed in the first onset.

This victory so greatly increased the reputation of Castruccio that
Uguccione conceived some jealousy and suspicion of him, because it
appeared to Uguccione that this victory had given him no increase of
power, but rather than diminished it. Being of this mind, he only waited
for an opportunity to give effect to it. This occurred on the death of
Pier Agnolo Micheli, a man of great repute and abilities in Lucca, the
murderer of whom fled to the house of Castruccio for refuge. On the
sergeants of the captain going to arrest the murderer, they were driven
off by Castruccio, and the murderer escaped. This affair coming to
the knowledge of Uguccione, who was than at Pisa, it appeared to him a
proper opportunity to punish Castruccio. He therefore sent for his
son Neri, who was the governor of Lucca, and commissioned him to take
Castruccio prisoner at a banquet and put him to death. Castruccio,
fearing no evil, went to the governor in a friendly way, was entertained
at supper, and then thrown into prison. But Neri, fearing to put him to
death lest the people should be incensed, kept him alive, in order to
hear further from his father concerning his intentions. Ugucionne cursed
the hesitation and cowardice of his son, and at once set out from Pisa
to Lucca with four hundred horsemen to finish the business in his own
way; but he had not yet reached the baths when the Pisans rebelled and
put his deputy to death and created Count Gaddo della Gherardesca their
lord. Before Uguccione reached Lucca he heard of the occurrences at
Pisa, but it did not appear wise to him to turn back, lest the Lucchese
with the example of Pisa before them should close their gates against
him. But the Lucchese, having heard of what had happened at Pisa,
availed themselves of this opportunity to demand the liberation of
Castruccio, notwithstanding that Uguccione had arrived in their city.
They first began to speak of it in private circles, afterwards openly
in the squares and streets; then they raised a tumult, and with arms in
their hands went to Uguccione and demanded that Castruccio should be
set at liberty. Uguccione, fearing that worse might happen, released him
from prison. Whereupon Castruccio gathered his friends around him, and
with the help of the people attacked Uguccione; who, finding he had no
resource but in flight, rode away with his friends to Lombardy, to the
lords of Scale, where he died in poverty.

But Castruccio from being a prisoner became almost a prince in Lucca,
and he carried himself so discreetly with his friends and the people
that they appointed him captain of their army for one year. Having
obtained this, and wishing to gain renown in war, he planned the
recovery of the many towns which had rebelled after the departure of
Uguccione, and with the help of the Pisans, with whom he had concluded a
treaty, he marched to Serezzana. To capture this place he constructed a
fort against it, which is called to-day Zerezzanello; in the course of
two months Castruccio captured the town. With the reputation gained
at that siege, he rapidly seized Massa, Carrara, and Lavenza, and in
a short time had overrun the whole of Lunigiana. In order to close the
pass which leads from Lombardy to Lunigiana, he besieged Pontremoli and
wrested it from the hands of Messer Anastagio Palavicini, who was the
lord of it. After this victory he returned to Lucca, and was welcomed by
the whole people. And now Castruccio, deeming it imprudent any longer to
defer making himself a prince, got himself created the lord of Lucca
by the help of Pazzino del Poggio, Puccinello dal Portico, Francesco
Boccansacchi, and Cecco Guinigi, all of whom he had corrupted; and he
was afterwards solemnly and deliberately elected prince by the people.
At this time Frederick of Bavaria, the King of the Romans, came into
Italy to assume the Imperial crown, and Castruccio, in order that
he might make friends with him, met him at the head of five hundred
horsemen. Castruccio had left as his deputy in Lucca, Pagolo Guinigi,
who was held in high estimation, because of the people's love for
the memory of his father. Castruccio was received in great honour by
Frederick, and many privileges were conferred upon him, and he was
appointed the emperor's lieutenant in Tuscany. At this time the Pisans
were in great fear of Gaddo della Gherardesca, whom they had driven out
of Pisa, and they had recourse for assistance to Frederick. Frederick
created Castruccio the lord of Pisa, and the Pisans, in dread of the
Guelph party, and particularly of the Florentines, were constrained to
accept him as their lord.

Frederick, having appointed a governor in Rome to watch his Italian
affairs, returned to Germany. All the Tuscan and Lombardian Ghibellines,
who followed the imperial lead, had recourse to Castruccio for help
and counsel, and all promised him the governorship of his country,
if enabled to recover it with his assistance. Among these exiles were
Matteo Guidi, Nardo Scolari, Lapo Uberti, Gerozzo Nardi, and Piero
Buonaccorsi, all exiled Florentines and Ghibellines. Castruccio had the
secret intention of becoming the master of all Tuscany by the aid of
these men and of his own forces; and in order to gain greater weight
in affairs, he entered into a league with Messer Matteo Visconti, the
Prince of Milan, and organized for him the forces of his city and the
country districts. As Lucca had five gates, he divided his own country
districts into five parts, which he supplied with arms, and enrolled the
men under captains and ensigns, so that he could quickly bring into the
field twenty thousand soldiers, without those whom he could summon to
his assistance from Pisa. While he surrounded himself with these forces
and allies, it happened at Messer Matteo Visconti was attacked by
the Guelphs of Piacenza, who had driven out the Ghibellines with the
assistance of a Florentine army and the King Ruberto. Messer Matteo
called upon Castruccio to invade the Florentines in their own
territories, so that, being attacked at home, they should be compelled
to draw their army out of Lombardy in order to defend themselves.
Castruccio invaded the Valdarno, and seized Fucecchio and San Miniato,
inflicting immense damage upon the country. Whereupon the Florentines
recalled their army, which had scarcely reached Tuscany, when Castruccio
was forced by other necessities to return to Lucca.

There resided in the city of Lucca the Poggio family, who were so
powerful that they could not only elevate Castruccio, but even advance
him to the dignity of prince; and it appearing to them they had not
received such rewards for their services as they deserved, they incited
other families to rebel and to drive Castruccio out of Lucca. They found
their opportunity one morning, and arming themselves, they set upon the
lieutenant whom Castruccio had left to maintain order and killed him.
They endeavoured to raise the people in revolt, but Stefano di Poggio, a
peaceable old man who had taken no hand in the rebellion, intervened and
compelled them by his authority to lay down their arms; and he offered
to be their mediator with Castruccio to obtain from him what
they desired. Therefore they laid down their arms with no greater
intelligence than they had taken them up. Castruccio, having heard
the news of what had happened at Lucca, at once put Pagolo Guinigi
in command of the army, and with a troop of cavalry set out for home.
Contrary to his expectations, he found the rebellion at an end, yet he
posted his men in the most advantageous places throughout the city. As
it appeared to Stefano that Castruccio ought to be very much obliged to
him, he sought him out, and without saying anything on his own behalf,
for he did not recognize any need for doing so, he begged Castruccio to
pardon the other members of his family by reason of their youth, their
former friendships, and the obligations which Castruccio was under to
their house. To this Castruccio graciously responded, and begged Stefano
to reassure himself, declaring that it gave him more pleasure to find
the tumult at an end than it had ever caused him anxiety to hear of its
inception. He encouraged Stefano to bring his family to him, saying
that he thanked God for having given him the opportunity of showing his
clemency and liberality. Upon the word of Stefano and Castruccio they
surrendered, and with Stefano were immediately thrown into prison and
put to death. Meanwhile the Florentines had recovered San Miniato,
whereupon it seemed advisable to Castruccio to make peace, as it did not
appear to him that he was sufficiently secure at Lucca to leave him.
He approached the Florentines with the proposal of a truce, which they
readily entertained, for they were weary of the war, and desirous of
getting rid of the expenses of it. A treaty was concluded with them for
two years, by which both parties agreed to keep the conquests they had
made. Castruccio thus released from this trouble, turned his attention
to affairs in Lucca, and in order that he should not again be subject to
the perils from which he had just escaped, he, under various pretences
and reasons, first wiped out all those who by their ambition might
aspire to the principality; not sparing one of them, but depriving them
of country and property, and those whom he had in his hands of life
also, stating that he had found by experience that none of them were to
be trusted. Then for his further security he raised a fortress in Lucca
with the stones of the towers of those whom he had killed or hunted out
of the state.

Whilst Castruccio made peace with the Florentines, and strengthened his
position in Lucca, he neglected no opportunity, short of open war, of
increasing his importance elsewhere. It appeared to him that if he could
get possession of Pistoia, he would have one foot in Florence, which was
his great desire. He, therefore, in various ways made friends with
the mountaineers, and worked matters so in Pistoia that both parties
confided their secrets to him. Pistoia was divided, as it always had
been, into the Bianchi and Neri parties; the head of the Bianchi was
Bastiano di Possente, and of the Neri, Jacopo da Gia. Each of these men
held secret communications with Castruccio, and each desired to drive
the other out of the city; and, after many threatenings, they came to
blows. Jacopo fortified himself at the Florentine gate, Bastiano at that
of the Lucchese side of the city; both trusted more in Castruccio than
in the Florentines, because they believed that Castruccio was far more
ready and willing to fight than the Florentines, and they both sent to
him for assistance. He gave promises to both, saying to Bastiano that he
would come in person, and to Jacopo that he would send his pupil, Pagolo
Guinigi. At the appointed time he sent forward Pagolo by way of Pisa,
and went himself direct to Pistoia; at midnight both of them met outside
the city, and both were admitted as friends. Thus the two leaders
entered, and at a signal given by Castruccio, one killed Jacopo da Gia,
and the other Bastiano di Possente, and both took prisoners or killed
the partisans of either faction. Without further opposition Pistoia
passed into the hands of Castruccio, who, having forced the Signoria to
leave the palace, compelled the people to yield obedience to him,
making them many promises and remitting their old debts. The countryside
flocked to the city to see the new prince, and all were filled with hope
and quickly settled down, influenced in a great measure by his great
valour.

About this time great disturbances arose in Rome, owing to the dearness
of living which was caused by the absence of the pontiff at Avignon. The
German governor, Enrico, was much blamed for what happened--murders and
tumults following each other daily, without his being able to put an end
to them. This caused Enrico much anxiety lest the Romans should call
in Ruberto, the King of Naples, who would drive the Germans out of the
city, and bring back the Pope. Having no nearer friend to whom he could
apply for help than Castruccio, he sent to him, begging him not only
to give him assistance, but also to come in person to Rome. Castruccio
considered that he ought not to hesitate to render the emperor this
service, because he believed that he himself would not be safe if at any
time the emperor ceased to hold Rome. Leaving Pagolo Guinigi in command
at Lucca, Castruccio set out for Rome with six hundred horsemen, where
he was received by Enrico with the greatest distinction. In a short time
the presence of Castruccio obtained such respect for the emperor that,
without bloodshed or violence, good order was restored, chiefly by
reason of Castruccio having sent by sea from the country round Pisa
large quantities of corn, and thus removed the source of the trouble.
When he had chastised some of the Roman leaders, and admonished others,
voluntary obedience was rendered to Enrico. Castruccio received many
honours, and was made a Roman senator. This dignity was assumed with the
greatest pomp, Castruccio being clothed in a brocaded toga, which had
the following words embroidered on its front: "I am what God wills."
Whilst on the back was: "What God desires shall be."

During this time the Florentines, who were much enraged that Castruccio
should have seized Pistoia during the truce, considered how they could
tempt the city to rebel, to do which they thought would not be difficult
in his absence. Among the exiled Pistoians in Florence were Baldo Cecchi
and Jacopo Baldini, both men of leading and ready to face danger. These
men kept up communications with their friends in Pistoia, and with the
aid of the Florentines entered the city by night, and after driving out
some of Castruccio's officials and partisans, and killing others, they
restored the city to its freedom. The news of this greatly angered
Castruccio, and taking leave of Enrico, he pressed on in great haste to
Pistoia. When the Florentines heard of his return, knowing that he would
lose no time, they decided to intercept him with their forces in the
Val di Nievole, under the belief that by doing so they would cut off his
road to Pistoia. Assembling a great army of the supporters of the Guelph
cause, the Florentines entered the Pistoian territories. On the other
hand, Castruccio reached Montecarlo with his army; and having heard
where the Florentines' lay, he decided not to encounter it in the plains
of Pistoia, nor to await it in the plains of Pescia, but, as far as
he possibly could, to attack it boldly in the Pass of Serravalle. He
believed that if he succeeded in this design, victory was assured,
although he was informed that the Florentines had thirty thousand men,
whilst he had only twelve thousand. Although he had every confidence
in his own abilities and the valour of his troops, yet he hesitated to
attack his enemy in the open lest he should be overwhelmed by numbers.
Serravalle is a castle between Pescia and Pistoia, situated on a hill
which blocks the Val di Nievole, not in the exact pass, but about a
bowshot beyond; the pass itself is in places narrow and steep, whilst in
general it ascends gently, but is still narrow, especially at the summit
where the waters divide, so that twenty men side by side could hold it.
The lord of Serravalle was Manfred, a German, who, before Castruccio
became lord of Pistoia, had been allowed to remain in possession of the
castle, it being common to the Lucchese and the Pistoians, and unclaimed
by either--neither of them wishing to displace Manfred as long as he
kept his promise of neutrality, and came under obligations to no one.
For these reasons, and also because the castle was well fortified,
he had always been able to maintain his position. It was here that
Castruccio had determined to fall upon his enemy, for here his few men
would have the advantage, and there was no fear lest, seeing the large
masses of the hostile force before they became engaged, they should not
stand. As soon as this trouble with Florence arose, Castruccio saw the
immense advantage which possession of this castle would give him, and
having an intimate friendship with a resident in the castle, he managed
matters so with him that four hundred of his men were to be admitted
into the castle the night before the attack on the Florentines, and the
castellan put to death.

Castruccio, having prepared everything, had now to encourage the
Florentines to persist in their desire to carry the seat of war away
from Pistoia into the Val di Nievole, therefore he did not move his
army from Montecarlo. Thus the Florentines hurried on until they reached
their encampment under Serravalle, intending to cross the hill on the
following morning. In the meantime, Castruccio had seized the castle at
night, had also moved his army from Montecarlo, and marching from thence
at midnight in dead silence, had reached the foot of Serravalle: thus he
and the Florentines commenced the ascent of the hill at the same time in
the morning. Castruccio sent forward his infantry by the main road,
and a troop of four hundred horsemen by a path on the left towards the
castle. The Florentines sent forward four hundred cavalry ahead of
their army which was following, never expecting to find Castruccio in
possession of the hill, nor were they aware of his having seized the
castle. Thus it happened that the Florentine horsemen mounting the hill
were completely taken by surprise when they discovered the infantry of
Castruccio, and so close were they upon it they had scarcely time to
pull down their visors. It was a case of unready soldiers being attacked
by ready, and they were assailed with such vigour that with difficulty
they could hold their own, although some few of them got through. When
the noise of the fighting reached the Florentine camp below, it was
filled with confusion. The cavalry and infantry became inextricably
mixed: the captains were unable to get their men either backward or
forward, owing to the narrowness of the pass, and amid all this tumult
no one knew what ought to be done or what could be done. In a short time
the cavalry who were engaged with the enemy's infantry were scattered
or killed without having made any effective defence because of their
unfortunate position, although in sheer desperation they had offered
a stout resistance. Retreat had been impossible, with the mountains on
both flanks, whilst in front were their enemies, and in the rear their
friends. When Castruccio saw that his men were unable to strike a
decisive blow at the enemy and put them to flight, he sent one thousand
infantrymen round by the castle, with orders to join the four hundred
horsemen he had previously dispatched there, and commanded the whole
force to fall upon the flank of the enemy. These orders they carried out
with such fury that the Florentines could not sustain the attack,
but gave way, and were soon in full retreat--conquered more by their
unfortunate position than by the valour of their enemy. Those in the
rear turned towards Pistoia, and spread through the plains, each
man seeking only his own safety. The defeat was complete and very
sanguinary. Many captains were taken prisoners, among whom were
Bandini dei Rossi, Francesco Brunelleschi, and Giovanni della Tosa, all
Florentine noblemen, with many Tuscans and Neapolitans who fought on the
Florentine side, having been sent by King Ruberto to assist the Guelphs.
Immediately the Pistoians heard of this defeat they drove out the
friends of the Guelphs, and surrendered to Castruccio. He was not
content with occupying Prato and all the castles on the plains on both
sides of the Arno, but marched his army into the plain of Peretola,
about two miles from Florence. Here he remained many days, dividing the
spoils, and celebrating his victory with feasts and games, holding
horse races, and foot races for men and women. He also struck medals
in commemoration of the defeat of the Florentines. He endeavoured to
corrupt some of the citizens of Florence, who were to open the city
gates at night; but the conspiracy was discovered, and the participators
in it taken and beheaded, among whom were Tommaso Lupacci and
Lambertuccio Frescobaldi. This defeat caused the Florentines great
anxiety, and despairing of preserving their liberty, they sent envoys to
King Ruberto of Naples, offering him the dominion of their city; and he,
knowing of what immense importance the maintenance of the Guelph cause
was to him, accepted it. He agreed with the Florentines to receive from
them a yearly tribute of two hundred thousand florins, and he send his
son Carlo to Florence with four thousand horsemen.

Shortly after this the Florentines were relieved in some degree of the
pressure of Castruccio's army, owing to his being compelled to leave
his positions before Florence and march on Pisa, in order to suppress a
conspiracy that had been raised against him by Benedetto Lanfranchi,
one of the first men in Pisa, who could not endure that his fatherland
should be under the dominion of the Lucchese. He had formed this
conspiracy, intending to seize the citadel, kill the partisans of
Castruccio, and drive out the garrison. As, however, in a conspiracy
paucity of numbers is essential to secrecy, so for its execution a few
are not sufficient, and in seeking more adherents to his conspiracy
Lanfranchi encountered a person who revealed the design to Castruccio.
This betrayal cannot be passed by without severe reproach to Bonifacio
Cerchi and Giovanni Guidi, two Florentine exiles who were suffering
their banishment in Pisa. Thereupon Castruccio seized Benedetto and put
him to death, and beheaded many other noble citizens, and drove their
families into exile. It now appeared to Castruccio that both Pisa and
Pistoia were thoroughly disaffected; he employed much thought and energy
upon securing his position there, and this gave the Florentines their
opportunity to reorganize their army, and to await the coming of Carlo,
the son of the King of Naples. When Carlo arrived they decided to lose
no more time, and assembled a great army of more than thirty thousand
infantry and ten thousand cavalry--having called to their aid every
Guelph there was in Italy. They consulted whether they should attack
Pistoia or Pisa first, and decided that it would be better to march on
the latter--a course, owing to the recent conspiracy, more likely to
succeed, and of more advantage to them, because they believed that the
surrender of Pistoia would follow the acquisition of Pisa.

In the early part of May 1328, the Florentines put in motion this army
and quickly occupied Lastra, Signa, Montelupo, and Empoli, passing from
thence on to San Miniato. When Castruccio heard of the enormous army
which the Florentines were sending against him, he was in no degree
alarmed, believing that the time had now arrived when Fortune would
deliver the empire of Tuscany into his hands, for he had no reason to
think that his enemy would make a better fight, or had better prospects
of success, than at Pisa or Serravalle. He assembled twenty thousand
foot soldiers and four thousand horsemen, and with this army went to
Fucecchio, whilst he sent Pagolo Guinigi to Pisa with five thousand
infantry. Fucecchio has a stronger position than any other town in
the Pisan district, owing to its situation between the rivers Arno and
Gusciana and its slight elevation above the surrounding plain. Moreover,
the enemy could not hinder its being victualled unless they divided
their forces, nor could they approach it either from the direction
of Lucca or Pisa, nor could they get through to Pisa, or attack
Castruccio's forces except at a disadvantage. In one case they would
find themselves placed between his two armies, the one under his own
command and the other under Pagolo, and in the other case they would
have to cross the Arno to get to close quarters with the enemy, an
undertaking of great hazard. In order to tempt the Florentines to take
this latter course, Castruccio withdrew his men from the banks of the
river and placed them under the walls of Fucecchio, leaving a wide
expanse of land between them and the river.

The Florentines, having occupied San Miniato, held a council of war to
decide whether they should attack Pisa or the army of Castruccio, and,
having weighed the difficulties of both courses, they decided upon the
latter. The river Arno was at that time low enough to be fordable, yet
the water reached to the shoulders of the infantrymen and to the
saddles of the horsemen. On the morning of 10 June 1328, the Florentines
commenced the battle by ordering forward a number of cavalry and ten
thousand infantry. Castruccio, whose plan of action was fixed, and
who well knew what to do, at once attacked the Florentines with five
thousand infantry and three thousand horsemen, not allowing them to
issue from the river before he charged them; he also sent one thousand
light infantry up the river bank, and the same number down the Arno. The
infantry of the Florentines were so much impeded by their arms and the
water that they were not able to mount the banks of the river, whilst
the cavalry had made the passage of the river more difficult for the
others, by reason of the few who had crossed having broken up the bed of
the river, and this being deep with mud, many of the horses rolled over
with their riders and many of them had stuck so fast that they could not
move. When the Florentine captains saw the difficulties their men were
meeting, they withdrew them and moved higher up the river, hoping to
find the river bed less treacherous and the banks more adapted for
landing. These men were met at the bank by the forces which Castruccio
had already sent forward, who, being light armed with bucklers and
javelins in their hands, let fly with tremendous shouts into the faces
and bodies of the cavalry. The horses, alarmed by the noise and the
wounds, would not move forward, and trampled each other in great
confusion. The fight between the men of Castruccio and those of the
enemy who succeeded in crossing was sharp and terrible; both sides
fought with the utmost desperation and neither would yield. The soldiers
of Castruccio fought to drive the others back into the river, whilst the
Florentines strove to get a footing on land in order to make room for
the others pressing forward, who if they could but get out of the water
would be able to fight, and in this obstinate conflict they were urged
on by their captains. Castruccio shouted to his men that these were the
same enemies whom they had before conquered at Serravalle, whilst the
Florentines reproached each other that the many should be overcome by
the few. At length Castruccio, seeing how long the battle had lasted,
and that both his men and the enemy were utterly exhausted, and that
both sides had many killed and wounded, pushed forward another body of
infantry to take up a position at the rear of those who were fighting;
he then commanded these latter to open their ranks as if they intended
to retreat, and one part of them to turn to the right and another to
the left. This cleared a space of which the Florentines at once took
advantage, and thus gained possession of a portion of the battlefield.
But when these tired soldiers found themselves at close quarters with
Castruccio's reserves they could not stand against them and at once fell
back into the river. The cavalry of either side had not as yet gained
any decisive advantage over the other, because Castruccio, knowing his
inferiority in this arm, had commanded his leaders only to stand on the
defensive against the attacks of their adversaries, as he hoped that
when he had overcome the infantry he would be able to make short work
of the cavalry. This fell out as he had hoped, for when he saw the
Florentine army driven back across the river he ordered the remainder
of his infantry to attack the cavalry of the enemy. This they did with
lance and javelin, and, joined by their own cavalry, fell upon the
enemy with the greatest fury and soon put him to flight. The Florentine
captains, having seen the difficulty their cavalry had met with in
crossing the river, had attempted to make their infantry cross lower
down the river, in order to attack the flanks of Castruccio's army.
But here, also, the banks were steep and already lined by the men of
Castruccio, and this movement was quite useless. Thus the Florentines
were so completely defeated at all points that scarcely a third of them
escaped, and Castruccio was again covered with glory. Many captains were
taken prisoners, and Carlo, the son of King Ruberto, with Michelagnolo
Falconi and Taddeo degli Albizzi, the Florentine commissioners, fled to
Empoli. If the spoils were great, the slaughter was infinitely greater,
as might be expected in such a battle. Of the Florentines there fell
twenty thousand two hundred and thirty-one men, whilst Castruccio lost
one thousand five hundred and seventy men.

But Fortune growing envious of the glory of Castruccio took away his
life just at the time when she should have preserved it, and thus ruined
all those plans which for so long a time he had worked to carry into
effect, and in the successful prosecution of which nothing but death
could have stopped him. Castruccio was in the thick of the battle the
whole of the day; and when the end of it came, although fatigued and
overheated, he stood at the gate of Fucecchio to welcome his men on
their return from victory and personally thank them. He was also on the
watch for any attempt of the enemy to retrieve the fortunes of the day;
he being of the opinion that it was the duty of a good general to be the
first man in the saddle and the last out of it. Here Castruccio stood
exposed to a wind which often rises at midday on the banks of the Arno,
and which is often very unhealthy; from this he took a chill, of which
he thought nothing, as he was accustomed to such troubles; but it was
the cause of his death. On the following night he was attacked with high
fever, which increased so rapidly that the doctors saw it must prove
fatal. Castruccio, therefore, called Pagolo Guinigi to him, and
addressed him as follows:

"If I could have believed that Fortune would have cut me off in the
midst of the career which was leading to that glory which all my
successes promised, I should have laboured less, and I should have
left thee, if a smaller state, at least with fewer enemies and perils,
because I should have been content with the governorships of Lucca and
Pisa. I should neither have subjugated the Pistoians, nor outraged the
Florentines with so many injuries. But I would have made both these
peoples my friends, and I should have lived, if no longer, at least more
peacefully, and have left you a state without a doubt smaller, but one
more secure and established on a surer foundation. But Fortune, who
insists upon having the arbitrament of human affairs, did not endow me
with sufficient judgment to recognize this from the first, nor the time
to surmount it. Thou hast heard, for many have told thee, and I have
never concealed it, how I entered the house of thy father whilst yet a
boy--a stranger to all those ambitions which every generous soul should
feel--and how I was brought up by him, and loved as though I had been
born of his blood; how under his governance I learned to be valiant and
capable of availing myself of all that fortune, of which thou hast been
witness. When thy good father came to die, he committed thee and all his
possessions to my care, and I have brought thee up with that love, and
increased thy estate with that care, which I was bound to show. And in
order that thou shouldst not only possess the estate which thy father
left, but also that which my fortune and abilities have gained, I have
never married, so that the love of children should never deflect my mind
from that gratitude which I owed to the children of thy father. Thus I
leave thee a vast estate, of which I am well content, but I am deeply
concerned, inasmuch as I leave it thee unsettled and insecure. Thou hast
the city of Lucca on thy hands, which will never rest contented under
they government. Thou hast also Pisa, where the men are of nature
changeable and unreliable, who, although they may be sometimes held
in subjection, yet they will ever disdain to serve under a Lucchese.
Pistoia is also disloyal to thee, she being eaten up with factions and
deeply incensed against thy family by reason of the wrongs recently
inflicted upon them. Thou hast for neighbours the offended Florentines,
injured by us in a thousand ways, but not utterly destroyed, who
will hail the news of my death with more delight than they would the
acquisition of all Tuscany. In the Emperor and in the princes of Milan
thou canst place no reliance, for they are far distant, slow, and their
help is very long in coming. Therefore, thou hast no hope in anything
but in thine own abilities, and in the memory of my valour, and in the
prestige which this latest victory has brought thee; which, as thou
knowest how to use it with prudence, will assist thee to come to terms
with the Florentines, who, as they are suffering under this great
defeat, should be inclined to listen to thee. And whereas I have sought
to make them my enemies, because I believed that war with them would
conduce to my power and glory, thou hast every inducement to make
friends of them, because their alliance will bring thee advantages
and security. It is of the greatest important in this world that a man
should know himself, and the measure of his own strength and means; and
he who knows that he has not a genius for fighting must learn how to
govern by the arts of peace. And it will be well for thee to rule
they conduct by my counsel, and to learn in this way to enjoy what my
life-work and dangers have gained; and in this thou wilt easily succeed
when thou hast learnt to believe that what I have told thee is true. And
thou wilt be doubly indebted to me, in that I have left thee this realm
and have taught thee how to keep it."

After this there came to Castruccio those citizens of Pisa, Pistoia, and
Lucca, who had been fighting at his side, and whilst recommending Pagolo
to them, and making them swear obedience to him as his successor, he
died. He left a happy memory to those who had known him, and no
prince of those times was ever loved with such devotion as he was. His
obsequies were celebrated with every sign of mourning, and he was buried
in San Francesco at Lucca. Fortune was not so friendly to Pagolo Guinigi
as she had been to Castruccio, for he had not the abilities. Not long
after the death of Castruccio, Pagolo lost Pisa, and then Pistoia, and
only with difficulty held on to Lucca. This latter city continued in the
family of Guinigi until the time of the great-grandson of Pagolo.

From what has been related here it will be seen that Castruccio was a
man of exceptional abilities, not only measured by men of his own
time, but also by those of an earlier date. In stature he was above
the ordinary height, and perfectly proportioned. He was of a gracious
presence, and he welcomed men with such urbanity that those who spoke
with him rarely left him displeased. His hair was inclined to be red,
and he wore it cut short above the ears, and, whether it rained or
snowed, he always went without a hat. He was delightful among friends,
but terrible to his enemies; just to his subjects; ready to play false
with the unfaithful, and willing to overcome by fraud those whom he
desired to subdue, because he was wont to say that it was the victory
that brought the glory, not the methods of achieving it. No one was
bolder in facing danger, none more prudent in extricating himself. He
was accustomed to say that men ought to attempt everything and fear
nothing; that God is a lover of strong men, because one always sees that
the weak are chastised by the strong. He was also wonderfully sharp or
biting though courteous in his answers; and as he did not look for any
indulgence in this way of speaking from others, so he was not angered
with others did not show it to him. It has often happened that he has
listened quietly when others have spoken sharply to him, as on the
following occasions. He had caused a ducat to be given for a partridge,
and was taken to task for doing so by a friend, to whom Castruccio had
said: "You would not have given more than a penny." "That is true,"
answered the friend. Then said Castruccio to him: "A ducat is much less
to me." Having about him a flatterer on whom he had spat to show that
he scorned him, the flatterer said to him: "Fisherman are willing to let
the waters of the sea saturate them in order that they make take a few
little fishes, and I allow myself to be wetted by spittle that I may
catch a whale"; and this was not only heard by Castruccio with patience
but rewarded. When told by a priest that it was wicked for him to live
so sumptuously, Castruccio said: "If that be a vice than you should
not fare so splendidly at the feasts of our saints." Passing through a
street he saw a young man as he came out of a house of ill fame blush at
being seen by Castruccio, and said to him: "Thou shouldst not be ashamed
when thou comest out, but when thou goest into such places." A friend
gave him a very curiously tied knot to undo and was told: "Fool, do
you think that I wish to untie a thing which gave so much trouble to
fasten." Castruccio said to one who professed to be a philosopher: "You
are like the dogs who always run after those who will give them the best
to eat," and was answered: "We are rather like the doctors who go to the
houses of those who have the greatest need of them." Going by water from
Pisa to Leghorn, Castruccio was much disturbed by a dangerous storm that
sprang up, and was reproached for cowardice by one of those with him,
who said that he did not fear anything. Castruccio answered that he
did not wonder at that, since every man valued his soul for what is was
worth. Being asked by one what he ought to do to gain estimation, he
said: "When thou goest to a banquet take care that thou dost not seat
one piece of wood upon another." To a person who was boasting that he
had read many things, Castruccio said: "He knows better than to boast
of remembering many things." Someone bragged that he could drink much
without becoming intoxicated. Castruccio replied: "An ox does the
same." Castruccio was acquainted with a girl with whom he had intimate
relations, and being blamed by a friend who told him that it was
undignified for him to be taken in by a woman, he said: "She has not
taken me in, I have taken her." Being also blamed for eating very dainty
foods, he answered: "Thou dost not spend as much as I do?" and being
told that it was true, he continued: "Then thou art more avaricious
than I am gluttonous." Being invited by Taddeo Bernardi, a very rich and
splendid citizen of Luca, to supper, he went to the house and was shown
by Taddeo into a chamber hung with silk and paved with fine stones
representing flowers and foliage of the most beautiful colouring.
Castruccio gathered some saliva in his mouth and spat it out upon
Taddeo, and seeing him much disturbed by this, said to him: "I knew not
where to spit in order to offend thee less." Being asked how Caesar
died he said: "God willing I will die as he did." Being one night in the
house of one of his gentlemen where many ladies were assembled, he was
reproved by one of his friends for dancing and amusing himself with
them more than was usual in one of his station, so he said: "He who is
considered wise by day will not be considered a fool at night." A person
came to demand a favour of Castruccio, and thinking he was not listening
to his plea threw himself on his knees to the ground, and being sharply
reproved by Castruccio, said: "Thou art the reason of my acting thus for
thou hast thy ears in thy feet," whereupon he obtained double the favour
he had asked. Castruccio used to say that the way to hell was an easy
one, seeing that it was in a downward direction and you travelled
blindfolded. Being asked a favour by one who used many superfluous
words, he said to him: "When you have another request to make, send
someone else to make it." Having been wearied by a similar man with a
long oration who wound up by saying: "Perhaps I have fatigued you by
speaking so long," Castruccio said: "You have not, because I have not
listened to a word you said." He used to say of one who had been a
beautiful child and who afterwards became a fine man, that he was
dangerous, because he first took the husbands from the wives and now he
took the wives from their husbands. To an envious man who laughed, he
said: "Do you laugh because you are successful or because another is
unfortunate?" Whilst he was still in the charge of Messer Francesco
Guinigi, one of his companions said to him: "What shall I give you if
you will let me give you a blow on the nose?" Castruccio answered:
"A helmet." Having put to death a citizen of Lucca who had been
instrumental in raising him to power, and being told that he had done
wrong to kill one of his old friends, he answered that people deceived
themselves; he had only killed a new enemy. Castruccio praised greatly
those men who intended to take a wife and then did not do so, saying
that they were like men who said they would go to sea, and then refused
when the time came. He said that it always struck him with surprise that
whilst men in buying an earthen or glass vase would sound it first to
learn if it were good, yet in choosing a wife they were content with
only looking at her. He was once asked in what manner he would wish to
be buried when he died, and answered: "With the face turned downwards,
for I know when I am gone this country will be turned upside down." On
being asked if it had ever occurred to him to become a friar in order to
save his soul, he answered that it had not, because it appeared strange
to him that Fra Lazerone should go to Paradise and Uguccione della
Faggiuola to the Inferno. He was once asked when should a man eat to
preserve his health, and replied: "If the man be rich let him eat
when he is hungry; if he be poor, then when he can." Seeing on of his
gentlemen make a member of his family lace him up, he said to him: "I
pray God that you will let him feed you also." Seeing that someone had
written upon his house in Latin the words: "May God preserve this house
from the wicked," he said, "The owner must never go in." Passing through
one of the streets he saw a small house with a very large door, and
remarked: "That house will fly through the door." He was having a
discussion with the ambassador of the King of Naples concerning the
property of some banished nobles, when a dispute arose between them, and
the ambassador asked him if he had no fear of the king. "Is this king of
yours a bad man or a good one?" asked Castruccio, and was told that he
was a good one, whereupon he said, "Why should you suggest that I should
be afraid of a good man?"

I could recount many other stories of his sayings both witty and
weighty, but I think that the above will be sufficient testimony to
his high qualities. He lived forty-four years, and was in every way a
prince. And as he was surrounded by many evidences of his good fortune,
so he also desired to have near him some memorials of his bad fortune;
therefore the manacles with which he was chained in prison are to be
seen to this day fixed up in the tower of his residence, where they were
placed by him to testify forever to his days of adversity. As in
his life he was inferior neither to Philip of Macedon, the father of
Alexander, nor to Scipio of Rome, so he died in the same year of his
age as they did, and he would doubtless have excelled both of them had
Fortune decreed that he should be born, not in Lucca, but in Macedonia
or Rome.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Prince, by Nicolo Machiavelli

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCE ***

***** This file should be named 1232.txt or 1232.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/2/3/1232/

Produced by John Bickers, David Widger and Others

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.





Introduction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To understand the notion of software engineering and why it is important
To appreciate the technical (engineering), managerial, and psychological aspects of software engineering
To understand the similarities and differences between software engineering and other engineering disciplines
To know the major phases in a software development project
To appreciate ethical dimensions in software engineering
To be aware of the time frame and extent to which new developments impact software engineering practice
 
Software engineering concerns methods and techniques to develop large software systems. The engineering metaphor is used to emphasize a systematic approach to develop systems that satisfy organizational requirements and constraints. This chapter gives a brief overview of the field and points at emerging trends that influence the way software is developed.
Computer science is still a young field. The first computers were built in the mid 1940s, since when the field has developed tremendously.
Applications from the early years of computerization can be characterized as follows: the programs were quite small, certainly when compared to those that are currently being constructed; they were written by one person; they were written and used by experts in the application area concerned. The problems to be solved were mostly of a technical nature, and the emphasis was on expressing known algorithms efficiently in some programming language. Input typically consisted of numerical data, read from such media as punched tape or punched cards. The output, also numeric, was printed on paper. Programs were run off-line. If the program contained errors, the programmer studied an octal or hexadecimal dump of memory. Sometimes, the execution of the program would be followed by binary reading machine registers at the console.
Independent software development companies hardly existed in those days. Software was mostly developed by hardware vendors and given away for free. These vendors sometimes set up user groups to discuss requirements, and next incorporated them into their software. This software development support was seen as a service to their customers.
Present-day applications are rather different in many respects. Present-day programs are often very large and are being developed by teams that collaborate over periods spanning several years. These teams may be scattered across the globe. The programmers are not the future users of the system they develop and they have no expert knowledge of the application area in question. The problems that are being tackled increasingly concern everyday life: automatic bank tellers, airline reservation, salary administration, electronic commerce, automotive systems, etc. Putting a man on the moon was not conceivable without computers.
In the 1960s, people started to realize that programming techniques had lagged behind the developments in software both in size and complexity. To many people, programming was still an art and had never become a craft. An additional problem was that many programmers had not been formally educated in the field. They had learned by doing. On the organizational side, attempted solutions to problems often involved adding more and more programmers to the project, the so-called million-monkey approach.
As a result, software was often delivered too late, programs did not behave as the user expected, programs were rarely adaptable to changed circumstances, and many errors were detected only after the software had been delivered to the customer. This became known as the software crisis.
This type of problem really became manifest in the 1960s. Under the auspices of NATO, two conferences were devoted to the topic in 1968 and 1969 (Naur and Randell, 1968), (Buxton and Randell, 1969). Here, the term software engineering was coined in a somewhat provocative sense. Shouldnt it be possible to build software in the way one builds bridges and houses, starting from a theoretical basis and using sound and proven design and construction techniques, as in other engineering fields?
Software serves some organizational purpose. The reasons for embarking on a software development project vary. Sometimes, a solution to a problem is not feasible without the aid of computers, such as weather forecasting, or automated bank telling. Sometimes, software can be used as a vehicle for new technologies, such as typesetting, the production of chips, or manned space trips. In yet other cases software may increase user service (library automation, e-commerce) or simply save money (automated stock control).
In many cases, the expected economic gain will be a major driving force. It may not, however, always be easy to prove that automation saves money (just think of office automation) because apart from direct cost savings, the economic gain may also manifest itself in such things as a more flexible production or a faster or better user service. In either case, it is a value-creating activity.
Boehm (1981) estimated the total expenditure on software in the US to be $40 billion in 1980. This is approximately 2% of the GNP. In 1985, the total expenditure had risen to $70 billion in the US and $140 billion worldwide. Boehm and Sullivan (1999) estimated the annual expenditure on software development in 1998 to be $300-400 billion in the US, and twice that amount worlwide.
So the cost of software is of crucial importance. This concerns not only the cost of developing the software, but also the cost of keeping the software operational once it has been delivered to the customer. In the course of time, hardware costs have decreased dramatically. Hardware costs now typically comprise less than 20% of total expenditure (figure 1.1). The remaining 80% comprise all non-hardware costs: the cost of programmers, analysts, management, user training, secretarial help, etc.
An aspect closely linked with cost is productivity. In the 1980s, the quest for data processing personnel increased by 12% per year, while the population of people working in data processing and the productivity of those people each grew by approximately 4% per year (Boehm, 1987a). This situation has not fundamentally changed (Jones, 1999). The net effect is a growing gap between demand and supply. The result is both a backlog with respect to the maintenance of existing software and a slowing down in the development of new applications. The combined effect may have repercussions on the competitive edge of an organization, especially so when there are severe time-to-market constraints. These developments have led to a shift from producing software to using software. Well come back to this topic in section 1.6 and chapter ??.
The issues of cost and productivity of software development deserve our serious attention. However, this is not the complete story. Society is increasingly dependent
 
Figure 1.1 Relative distribution of hardware/software costs. (Source: B.W. Boehm, Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on Computers, 1976 IEEE.)
on software. The quality of the systems we develop increasingly determines the quality of our existence. Consider as an example the following message from a Dutch newspaper on June 6, 1980, under the heading Americans saw the Russians coming:
For a short period last Tuesday the United States brought their atomic bombers and nuclear missiles to an increased state of alarm when, because of a computer error, a false alarm indicated that the Soviet Union had started a missile attack.
Efforts to repair the error were apparently in vain, for on June 9, 1980, the same newspaper reported:
For the second time within a few days, a deranged computer reported that the Soviet Union had started a nuclear attack against the United States. Last Saturday, the DoD affirmed the false message, which resulted in the engines of the planes of the strategic air force being started.
It is not always the world that is in danger. On a smaller scale, errors in software may have very unfortunate consequences, such as transaction errors in bank traffic; reminders to finally pay that bill of $0.00; a stock control system that issues orders too late and thus lays off complete divisions of a factory.
 
The latter example indicates that errors in a software system may have serious financial consequences for the organization using it. One example of such a financial loss is the large US airline company that lost $50M because of an error in their seat reservation system. The system erroneously reported that cheap seats were sold out, while in fact there were plenty available. The problem was detected only after quarterly results lagged considerably behind those of both their own previous periods and those of their competitors.
Errors in automated systems may even have fatal effects. One computer science weekly magazine contained the following message in April 1983:
The court in Du sseldorf has discharged a woman (54), who was on trial for murdering her daughter. An erroneous message from a computerized system made the insurance company inform her that she was seriously ill. She was said to suffer from an incurable form of syphilis. Moreover, she was said to have infected both her children. In panic, she strangled her 15 year old daughter and tried to kill her 13 year old son and herself. The boy escaped, and with some help he enlisted prevented the woman from dying of an overdose. The judge blamed the computer error and considered the woman not responsible for her actions.
This all marks the enormous importance of the field of software engineering. Better methods and techniques for software development may result in large financial savings, in more effective methods of software development, in systems that better fit user needs, in more reliable software systems, and thus in a more reliable environment in which those systems function. Quality and productivity are two central themes in the field of software engineering.
On the positive side, it is imperative to point to the enormous progress that has been made since the 1960s. Software is ubiquitous and scores of trustworthy systems have been built. These range from small spreadsheet applications to typesetting systems, banking systems, Web browsers and the Space Shuttle software. The techniques and methods discussed in this book have contributed their mite to the success of these and many other software development projects.
1.1	What is Software Engineering?
In various texts on this topic, one encounters a definition of the term software engineering. An early definition was given at the first NATO conference (Naur and Randell, 1968):
Software engineering is the establishment and use of sound engineering principles in order to obtain economically software that is reliable and works efficiently on real machines.
The definition given in the IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology (IEEE610, 1990) is as follows:
Software engineering is the application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the development, operation, and maintenance of software; that is, the application of engineering to software.
These and other definitions of the term software engineering use rather different words. However, the essential characteristics of the field are always, explicitly or implicitly, present:
Software engineering concerns the development of large programs.
(DeRemer and Kron, 1976) make a distinction between programming-in-thelarge and programming-in-the-small. The borderline between large and small obviously is not sharp: a program of 100 lines is small, a program of 50 000 lines of code certainly is not. Programming-in-the-small generally refers to programs written by one person in a relatively short period of time. Programming-in-thelarge, then, refers to multi-person jobs that span, say, more than half a year. For example:
	The NASA Space Shuttle software contains 40M lines of object code (this is 30 times as much as the software for the Saturn V project from the 1960s) (Boehm, 1981);
	The IBM OS360 operating system took 5000 man years of development effort (Brooks, 1995).
Traditional programming techniques and tools are primarily aimed at supporting programming-in-the-small. This not only holds for programming languages, but also for the tools (like flowcharts) and methods (like structured programming). These cannot be directly transferred to the development of large programs.
In fact, the term program -- in the sense of a self-contained piece of software that can be invoked by a user or some other system component -- is not adequate here. Present-day software development projects result in systems containing a large number of (interrelated) programs -- or components.
The central theme is mastering complexity.
In general, the problems are such that they cannot be surveyed in their entirety. One is forced to split the problem into parts such that each individual part can be grasped, while the communication between the parts remains simple. The total complexity does not decrease in this way, but it does become manageable. In a stereo system there are components such as an amplifier, a receiver, and a tuner, and communication via a thin wire. In software, we strive for a similar separation of concerns. In a program for library automation, components such as user interaction, search processes and data storage could for instance be distinguished, with clearly given facilities for data exchange between those components. Note that the complexity of many a piece of software is not so much caused by the intrinsic complexity of the problem (as in the case of compiler optimization algorithms or numerical algorithms to solve partial differential equations), but rather by the vast number of details that must be dealt with.
Software evolves.
Most software models a part of reality, such as processing requests in a library or tracking money transfers in a bank. This reality evolves. If software is not to become obsolete fairly quickly, it has to evolve with the reality that is being modeled. This means that costs are incurred after delivery of the software system and that we have to bear this evolution in mind during development.
The efficiency with which software is developed is of crucial importance.
Total cost and development time of software projects is high. This also holds for the maintenance of software. The quest for new applications surpasses the workforce resource. The gap between supply and demand is growing. Timeto-market demands ask for quick delivery. Important themes within the field of software engineering concern better and more efficient methods and tools for the development and maintenance of software, especially methods and tools enabling the use and reuse of components.
Regular cooperation between people is an integral part of programming-in-the-large.
Since the problems are large, many people have to work concurrently at solving those problems. Increasingly often, teams at different geographic locations work together in software development. There must be clear arrangements for the distribution of work, methods of communication, responsibilities, and so on. Arrangements alone are not sufficient, though; one also has to stick to those arrangements. In order to enforce them, standards or procedures may be employed. Those procedures and standards can often be supported by tools. Discipline is one of the keys to the successful completion of a software development project.
The software has to support its users effectively.
Software is developed in order to support users at work. The functionality offered should fit users tasks. Users that are not satisfied with the system will try to circumvent it or, at best, voice new requirements immediately. It is not sufficient to build the system in the right way, we also have to build the right system. Effective user support means that we must carefully study users at work, in order to determine the proper functional requirements, and we must address usability and other quality aspects as well, such as reliability, responsiveness, and user-friendliness. It also means that software development entails more than delivering software. User manuals and training material may have to be written, and attention must be given to developing the environment in which the new system is going to be installed. For example, a new automated library system will affect working procedures within the library.
Software engineering is a field in which members of one culture create artifacts on behalf of members of another culture.
This aspect is closely linked to the previous two items. Software engineers are expert in one or more areas such as programming in Java, software architecture, testing, or the Unified Modeling Language. They are generally not experts in library management, avionics, or banking. Yet they have to develop systems for such domains. The thin spread of application domain knowledge is a common source of problems in software development projects.
Not only do software engineers lack factual knowledge of the domain for which they develop software, they lack knowledge of its culture as well. For example, a software developer may discover the official set of work practices of a certain user community from interviews, written policies, and the like; these work practices are then built into the software. A crucial question with respect to system acceptance and success, however, is whether that community actually follows those work practices. For an outside observer, this question is much more difficult to answer.
Software engineering is a balancing act.
In most realistic cases, it is illusive to assume that the collection of requirements voiced at the start of the project is the only factor that counts. In fact, the term requirement is a misnomer. It suggests something immutable, while in fact most requirements are negotiable. There are numerous business, technical and political constraints that may influence a software development project. For example, one may decide to use database technology X rather than Y, simply because of available expertise with that technology. In extreme cases, characteristics of available components may determine functionality offered, rather than the other way around.
The above list shows that software engineering has many facets. Software engineering certainly is not the same as programming, although programming is an important ingredient of software engineering. Mathematical aspects play a role since we are concerned with the correctness of software. Sound engineering practices are needed to get useful products. Psychological and sociological aspects play a role in the communication between human and machine, organization and machine, and between humans. Finally, the development process needs to be controlled, which is a management issue.
The term software engineering hints at possible resemblances between the construction of programs and the construction of houses or bridges. These kinds of resemblances do exist. In both cases we work from a set of desired functions, using scientific and engineering techniques in a creative way. Techniques that have been applied successfully in the construction of physical artifacts are also helpful when applied to the construction of software systems: development of the product in a number of phases, a careful planning of these phases, continuous audit of the whole process, construction from a clear and complete design, etc.
Even in a mature engineering discipline, say bridge design, accidents do happen. Bridges collapse once in a while. Most problems in bridge design occur when designers extrapolate beyond their models and expertise. A famous example is the Tacoma Narrows Bridge failure in 1940. The designers of that bridge extrapolated beyond their experience to create more flexible stiffening girders for suspension bridges. They did not think about aerodynamics and the response of the bridge to wind. As a result, that bridge collapsed shortly after it was finished. This type of extrapolation seems to be the rule rather than the exception in software development. We regularly embark on software development projects that go far beyond our expertise.
There are additional reasons for considering the construction of software as something quite different from the construction of physical products. The cost of constructing software is incurred during development and not during production. Copying software is almost free. Software is logical in nature rather than physical. Physical products wear out in time and therefore have to be maintained. Software does not wear out. The need to maintain software is caused by errors detected late or by changing requirements of the user. Software reliability is determined by the manifestation of errors already present, not by physical factors such as wear and tear. We may even argue that software wears out because it is being maintained.
Viewing software engineering as a branch of engineering is problematic for another reason as well. The engineering metaphor hints at disciplined work, proper planning, good management, and the like. It suggests we deal with clearly defined needs, that can be fulfilled if we follow all the right steps. Many software development projects though involve the translation of some real world phenomenon into digital form. The knowledge embedded in this real life phenomenon is tacit, undefined, uncodified, and may have developed over a long period of time. The assumption that we are dealing with a well-defined problem simply does not hold. Rather, the design process is open ended, and the solution emerges as we go along. This dichotomy is reflected in views of the field put in the forefront over time (Eischen, 2002). In the early days, the field was seen as a craft. As a countermovement, the term software engineering was coined, and many factory concepts got introduced. In the late 1990s, the pendulum swung back again and the craft aspect got emphasized anew, in the agile movement (see chapter 3). Both engineering-like and craft-like aspects have their place, and we will give a balanced treatment of both.
Two characteristics that make software development projects extra difficult to manage are visibility and continuity. It is much more difficult to see progress in software construction than it is to notice progress in building a bridge. One often hears the phrase that a program is almost finished. One equally often underestimates the time needed to finish up the last bits and pieces.
This 90% complete syndrome is very pervasive in software development. Not knowing how to measure real progress, we often use a surrogate measure, the rate of expenditure of resources. For example, a project that has a budget of 100 persondays is perceived as being 50% complete after 50 person-days are expended. Strictly speaking, we then confuse speed with progress. Because of the imprecise measurement of progress and the customary underestimation of total effort, problems accumulate as time elapses.
Physical systems are often continuous in the sense that small changes in the specification lead to small changes in the product. This is not true with software. Small changes in the specification of software may lead to considerable changes in the software itself. In a similar way, small errors in software may have considerable effects. The Mariner space rocket to Venus for example got lost because of a typing error in a FORTRAN program. In 1998, the Mars Climate Orbiter got lost, because one development team used English units such as inches and feet, while another team used metric units.
We may likewise draw a comparison between software engineering and computer science. Computer science emerged as a separate discipline in the 1960s. It split from mathematics and has been heavily influenced by mathematics. Topics studied in computer science, such as algorithm complexity, formal languages, and the semantics of programming languages, have a strong mathematical flavor. PhD theses in computer science invariably contain theorems with accompanying proofs.
As the field of software engineering emerged from computer science, it had a similar inclination to focus on clean aspects of software development that can be formalized, in both teaching and research. We used to assume that requirements can be fully stated before the project started, concentrated on systems built from scratch, and ignored the reality of trading off quality aspects against the available budget. Not to mention the trenches of software maintenance.
Software engineering and computer science do have a considerable overlap. The practice of software engineering however also has to deal with such matters as the management of huge development projects, human factors (regarding both the development team and the prospective users of the system) and cost estimation and control. Software engineers must engineer software.
Software engineering has many things in common both with other fields of engineering and with computer science. It also has a face of its own in many ways.
	1.2	Phases in the Development of Software
When building a house, the builder does not start with piling up bricks. Rather, the requirements and possibilities of the client are analyzed first, taking into account such factors as family structure, hobbies, finances and the like. The architect takes these factors into consideration when designing a house. Only after the design has been agreed upon is the actual construction started.
It is expedient to act in the same way when constructing software. First, the problem to be solved is analyzed and the requirements are described in a very precise way. Then a design is made based on these requirements. Finally, the construction process, i.e. the actual programming of the solution, is started. There are a distinguishable number of phases in the development of software. The phases as discussed in this book are depicted in figure 1.2.
 
 
	Figure 1.2	A simple view of software development
The process model depicted in figure 1.2 is rather simple. In reality, things will usually be more complex. For instance, the design phase is often split into a global, architectural design phase and a detailed design phase, and often various test phases are distinguished. The basic elements, however, remain as given in figure 1.2. These phases have to be passed through in each project. Depending on the kind of project and the working environment, a more detailed scheme may be needed.
In figure 1.2, the phases have been depicted sequentially. For a given project these activities are not necessarily separated as strictly as indicated here. They may and usually will overlap. It is, for instance, quite possible to start implementation of one part of the system while some of the other parts have not been fully designed yet. As we will see in section 1.3, there is no strict linear progression from requirements engineering to design, from design to implementation, etc. Backtracking to earlier phases occurs, because of errors discovered or changing requirements. One had better think of these phases as a series of workflows. Early on, most resources are spent on the requirements engineering workflow. Later on, effort moves to the implementation and testing workflows.
Below, a short description is given of each of the basic elements from figure 1.2. Various alternative process models will be discussed in chapter 3. These alternative models result from justifiable criticism of the simple-minded model depicted in figure 1.2. The sole aim of our simple model is to provide an adequate structuring of topics to be addressed. The maintenance phase is further discussed in section 1.3. All elements of our process model will be treated much more elaborately in later chapters.
Requirements engineering. The goal of the requirements engineering phase is to get a complete description of the problem to be solved and the requirements posed by and on the environment in which the system is going to function. Requirements posed by the environment may include hardware and supporting software or the number of prospective users of the system to be developed. Alternatively, analysis of the requirements may lead to certain constraints imposed on hardware yet to be acquired or to the organization in which the system is to function. A description of the problem to be solved includes such things as:
	the functions of the software to be developed;
	possible future extensions to the system;
	the amount, and kind, of documentation required;
	response time and other performance requirements of the system.
Part of requirements engineering is a feasibility study. The purpose of the feasibility study is to assess whether there is a solution to the problem which is both economically and technically feasible.
The more careful we are during the requirements engineering phase, the larger is the chance that the ultimate system will meet expectations. To this end, the various people (among others, the customer, prospective users, designers, and programmers) involved have to collaborate intensively. These people often have widely different backgrounds, which does not ease communication.
The document in which the result of this activity is laid down is called the requirements specification.
Design. During the design phase, a model of the whole system is developed which, when encoded in some programming language, solves the problem for the user. To this end, the problem is decomposed into manageable pieces called components; the functions of these components and the interfaces between them are specified in a very precise way. The design phase is crucial. Requirements engineering and design are sometimes seen as an annoying introduction to programming, which is often seen as the real work. This attitude has a very negative influence on the quality of the resulting software.
Early design decisions have a major impact on the quality of the final system. These early design decisions may be captured in a global description of the system, i.e. its architecture. The architecture may next be evaluated, serve as a template for the development of a family of similar systems, or be used as a skeleton for the development of reusable components. As such, the architectural description of a system is an important milestone document in present-day software development projects.
During the design phase we try to separate the what from the how. We concentrate on the problem and should not let ourselves be distracted by implementation concerns.
The result of the design phase, the (technical) specification, serves as a starting point for the implementation phase. If the specification is formal in nature, it can also be used to derive correctness proofs.
Implementation. During the implementation phase, we concentrate on the individual components. Our starting point is the components specification. It is often necessary to introduce an extra design phase, the step from component specification to executable code often being too large. In such cases, we may take advantage of some high-level, programming-language-like notation, such as a pseudocode. (A pseudocode is a kind of programming language. Its syntax and semantics are in general less strict, so that algorithms can be formulated at a higher, more abstract, level.)
It is important to note that the first goal of a programmer should be the development of a well-documented, reliable, easy to read, flexible, correct, program. The goal is not to produce a very efficient program full of tricks. We will come back to the many dimensions of software quality in chapter 6.
During the design phase, a global structure is imposed through the introduction of components and their interfaces. In the more classic programming languages, much of this structure tends to get lost in the transition from design to code. More recent programming languages offer possibilities to retain this structure in the final code through the concept of modules or classes.
The result of the implementation phase is an executable program.
Testing. Actually, it is wrong to say that testing is a phase following implementation. This suggests that you need not bother about testing until implementation is finished. This is not true. It is even fair to say that this is one of the biggest mistakes you can make.
Attention has to be paid to testing even during the requirements engineering phase. During the subsequent phases, testing is continued and refined. The earlier that errors are detected, the cheaper it is to correct them.
Testing at phase boundaries comes in two flavors. We have to test that the transition between subsequent phases is correct (this is known as verification). We also have to check that we are still on the right track as regards fulfilling user requirements (validation). The result of adding verification and validation activities to the linear model of figure 1.2 yields the so-called waterfall model of software development (see also chapter 3).
Maintenance. After delivery of the software, there are often errors that have still gone undetected. Obviously, these errors must be repaired. In addition, the actual use of the system can lead to requests for changes and enhancements. All these types of changes are denoted by the rather unfortunate term maintenance. Maintenance thus concerns all activities needed to keep the system operational after it has been delivered to the user.
An activity spanning all phases is project management. Like other projects, software development projects must be managed properly in order to ensure that the product is delivered on time and within budget. The visibility and continuity characteristics of software development, as well as the fact that many software development projects are undertaken with insufficient prior experience, seriously impede project control. The many examples of software development projects that fail to meet their schedule provide ample evidence of the fact that we have by no means satisfactorily dealt with this issue yet. Chapters 2--8 deal with major aspects of software project management, such as project planning, team organization, quality issues, cost and schedule estimation.
An important activity not identified separately is documentation. A number of key ingredients of the documentation of a software project will be elaborated upon in the chapters to follow. Key components of system documentation include the project plan, quality plan, requirements specification, architecture description, design documentation and test plan. For larger projects, a considerable amount of effort will have to be spent on properly documenting the project. The documentation effort must start early on in the project. In practice, documentation is often seen as a balancing item. Since many projects are pressed for time, the documentation tends to get the worst of it. Software maintainers and developers know this, and adapt their way of working accordingly. As a rule of thumb, Lethbridge et al. (2003) states that, the closer one gets to the code, the more accurate the documentation must be for software engineers to use it. Outdated requirements documents and other high-level documentation may still give valuable clues. They are useful to people who have to learn about a new system or have to develop test cases, for instance. Outdated low-level documentation is worthless, and makes that programmers consult the code rather than its documentation. Since the system will undergo changes after delivery, because of errors that went undetected or changing user requirements, proper and up-to-date documentation is of crucial importance during maintenance.
A particularly noteworthy element of documentation is the user documentation. Software development should be task-oriented in the sense that the software to be delivered should support users in their task environment. Likewise, the user documentation should be task- oriented. User manuals should not just describe the features of a system, they should help people to get things done (Rettig, 1991). We cannot simply rely on the structure of the interface to organize the user documentation (just as a programming language reference manual is not an appropriate source for learning how to program).
Figure 1.3 depicts the relative effort spent on the various activities up to delivery of the system. From this data a very clear trend emerges, the so-called 40--20--40 rule: only 20% of the effort is spent on actually programming (coding) the system, while the preceding phases (requirements engineering and design) and testing each consume about 40% of the total effort.
 
	Figure 1.3	Relative effort for the various activities
Depending on specific boundary conditions, properties of the system to be constructed, and the like, variations to this rule can be found. For iterative development projects, the distinction between requirements engineering, design, implementation and (unit) testing gets blurred, for instance. For the majority of projects, however, this rule of thumb is quite workable.
This does not imply that the 40--20--40 rule is the one to be strived for. Errors made during requirements engineering are the ones that are most costly to repair (see also the chapter on testing). It is far better to put more energy into the requirements engineering phase, than to try to remove errors during the time-consuming testing phase or, worse still, during maintenance. According to (Boehm, 1987b), successful projects follow a 60--15--25 distribution: 60% requirements engineering and design, 15% implementation and 25% testing. The message is clear: the longer you postpone coding, the earlier you are finished.
Figure 1.3 does not show the extent of the maintenance effort. When we consider the total cost of a software system over its lifetime, it turns out that, on average, maintenance alone consumes 50--75% of these costs; see also figure 1.1. Thus, maintenance alone consumes more than the various development phases taken together.
	1.3	Maintenance or Evolution
The only thing we maintain is user satisfaction
(Lehman, 1980)
Once software has been delivered, it usually still contains errors which, upon discovery, must be repaired. Note that this type of maintenance is not caused by wearing. Rather, it concerns repair of hidden defects. This type of repair is comparable to that encountered after a newly-built house is first occupied.
The story becomes quite different if we start talking about changes or enhancements to the system. Repainting our office or repairing a leak in the roof of our house is called maintenance. Adding a wing to our office is seldom called maintenance.
This is more than a trifling game with words. Over the total lifetime of a software system, more money is spent on maintaining that system than on initial development. If all these expenses merely concerned the repair of errors made during one of the development phases, our business would be doing very badly indeed. Fortunately, this is not the case.
We distinguish four kinds of maintenance activities:
	corrective maintenance -- the repair of actual errors;
	adaptive maintenance -- adapting the software to changes in the environment, such as new hardware or the next release of an operating or database system;
	perfective maintenance -- adapting the software to new or changed user requirements, such as extra functions to be provided by the system. Perfective maintenance also includes work to increase the systems performance or to enhance its user interface;
	preventive maintenance -- increasing the systems future maintainability. Updating documentation, adding comments, or improving the modular structure of a system are examples of preventive maintenance activities.
Only the first category may rightfully be termed maintenance. This category, however, accounts only for about a quarter of the total maintenance effort. Approximately another quarter of the maintenance effort concerns adapting software to environmental changes, while half of the maintenance cost is spent on changes to accommodate changing user requirements, i.e. enhancements to the system (see figure 1.4).
Changes in both the systems environment and user requirements are inevitable. Software models part of reality, and reality changes, whether we like it or not. So the software has to change too. It has to evolve. A large percentage of what we are used to calling maintenance is actually evolution. Maintenance because of new user requirements occurs in both high and low quality systems. A successful system calls for new, unforeseen functionality, because of its use by many satisfied users. A less successful system has to be adapted in order to satisfy its customers.
 
 
	Figure 1.4	Distribution of maintenance activities
The result is that the software development process becomes cyclic, hence the phrase software life cycle. Backtracking to previous phases, alluded to above, does not only occur during maintenance. During other phases, also, we will from time to time iterate earlier phases. During design, it may be discovered that the requirements specification is not complete or contains conflicting requirements. During testing, errors introduced in the implementation or design phase may crop up. In these and similar cases an iteration of earlier phases is needed. We will come back to this cyclic nature of the software development process in chapter 3, when we discuss alternative models of the software development process.
1.4	From the Trenches
And such is the way of all superstition, whether in astrology, dreams, omens, divine judgments or the like; wherein men, having a delight in such vanities, mark the events when they are fulfilled, but when they fail, though this happens much oftener, neglect and pass them by. But with far more subtlety does this mischief insinuate itself into philosophy and the sciences; in which the first conclusion colours and brings into conformity with itself all that come after, though far sounder and better. Besides, independently of that delight and vanity which I have described, it is the peculiar and perpetual error of the human intellect to be more moved and excited by affirmatives than by negatives; whereas it ought properly to hold itself indifferently disposed towards both alike. Indeed in the establishment of any true axiom, the negative instance is the more forcible of the two.
Sir Francis Bacon, The New Organon, Aphorisms XLVI (1611)
Historical case studies contain a wealth of wisdom about the nature of design and the engineering method.
(Petroski, 1994)
In his wonderful book Design Paradigms, Case Histories of Error and Judgment in Engineering,
Henri Petroski tells us about some of the greatest engineering successes and, especially, failures of all time. Some such failure stories about our profession have appeared as well. Four of them are discussed in this section.
These stories are interesting because they teach us that software engineering has many facets. Failures in software development projects often are not one-dimensional. They are not only caused by a technical slip in some routine. They are not only caused by bad management. They are not only the result of human communication problems. It is often a combination of many smaller slips, which accumulate over time, and eventually result in a major failure. To paraphrase a famous saying of Fred Brooks about projects getting late:
How does a project really get into trouble?
One slip at a time.
Each of the stories discussed below shows such a cumulative effect. Successes in software development will not come about if we just employ the brightest programmers. Or apply the newest design philosophy. Or have the most extensive user consultation. Or even hire the best manager. You have to do all of that. And even more.
	1.4.1	Ariane 5, Flight 501
The maiden flight of the Ariane 5 launcher took place on June 4, 1996. After about 40 seconds, at an altitude of less than 4 kilometers, the launcher broke up and exploded. This $500M loss was ultimately caused by an overflow in the conversion from a 64-bit floating point number to a 16-bit signed integer. From a software engineering point of view, the Ariane 5 story is interesting because the failure can be attributed to different causes, at different levels of understanding: inadequate testing, wrong type of reuse, or a wrong design philosophy.
The altitude of the launcher and its movements in space are measured by an Inertial Reference System (SRI -- Syste`me de Reference Inertielle). There are two SRIs operating in parallel. Their hardware and software is identical. Most of the hardware and software for the SRI was retained from the Ariane 4. The fatal conversion took place in a piece of software in the SRI which is only meaningful before lift-off. Though this part of the software serves no purpose after the rocket has been launched, it keeps running for an additional number of seconds. This requirement was stated more than 10 years earlier for a somewhat peculiar reason. It allows for a quick restart of the countdown, in the case that it is interrupted close to lift-off. This requirement does not apply to the Ariane 5, but the software was left unchanged -- after all, it worked. Since the Ariane 5 is much faster than the Ariane 4, the rocket reaches a much higher horizontal velocity within this short period after lift-off, resulting in the above-mentioned overflow. Because of this overflow, the first SRI ceased to function. The second SRI was then activated, but since the hardware and software of both SRIs are identical, the second SRI failed as well. As a consequence, wrong data were transmitted from the SRI to the on-board computer.
On the basis of these wrong data, full nozzle deflections were commanded. These caused a very high aerodynamic load which led to the separation of the boosters from the main rocket. And this in turn triggered the self-destruction of the launcher.
There are several levels at which the Ariane 5 failure can be understood and explained:
It was a software failure, which could have been revealed with more extensive testing. This is true: the committee investigating the event managed to expose the failure using extensive simulations.
The failure was caused by reusing a flawed component. This is true as well but, because of physical characteristics of the Ariane 4, this flaw had never become apparent. There had been many successful Ariane 4 flights, using essentially the same SRI subsystem. Apparently, reuse is not compositional: the successful use of a component in one environment is no guarantee for successful reuse of that component in another environment.
The failure was caused by a flaw in the design. The Ariane software follows a typical hardware design philosophy: if a component breaks down, the cause is assumed to be random and it is handled by shutting down that part and invoking a backup component. In the case of a software failure, which is not random, an identical backup is of little use. For the software part, a different line might have been followed. For instance, the component could be asked to give its best estimate of the required information.
1.4.2	Therac-25
The Therac-25 is a computer-controlled radiation machine. It has three modes:
field-light mode. This position merely facilitates the correct positioning of the patient.
electron mode. In electron therapy, the computer controls the (variable) beam energy and current, and magnets spread the beam to a safe concentration.
photon (X-ray) mode. In photon mode, the beam energy is fixed. A beam flattener is put between the accelerator and the patient to produce a uniform treatment field. A very high current (some 100 times higher than in electron mode) is required on one side of the beam flattener to produce a reasonable treatment dose at the other side.
The machine has a turntable which rotates the necessary equipment into position. The basic hazardous situation is obvious from the above: a photon beam is issued by the accelerator, while the beam flattener is not in position. The patient is then treated with a dose which is far too high. This happened several times. As a consequence, several patients have died and others have been seriously injured.
One of the malfunctions of the Therac-25 has become known as Malfunction 54. A patient was set up for treatment. The operator keyed in the necessary data on the console in an adjacent room. While doing so, he made a mistake: he typed x (for X-ray mode) instead of e (for electron mode). He corrected his mistake by moving the cursor up to the appropriate field, typing in the correct code and pressing the return key a number of times until the cursor was on the command line again. He then pressed B (beam on). The machine stopped and issued the message Malfunction 54. This particular error message indicates a wrong dose, either too high or too low. The console indicated a substantial underdose. The operator knew that the machine often had quirks, and that these could usually be solved by simply pressing P (proceed). So he did. The same error message appeared again. Normally, the operator would have audio and video contact with the patient in the treatment room. Not this time, though: the audio was broken and the video had been turned off. It was later estimated that the patient had received 16 000--25 000 rad on a very small surface, instead of the intended dose of 180 rad. The patient became seriously ill and died five months later.
The cause of this hazardous event was traced back to the software operating the radiation machine. After the operator has finished data entry, the physical set up of the machine may begin. The bending of the magnets takes about eight seconds. After the magnets are put into position, it again checks if anything has changed. If the operator manages to make changes and return the cursor to the command line position within the eight seconds it takes to set the magnets, part of these changes will result in changes in internal system parameters, but the system nevertheless thinks that nothing has happened and simply continues. With the consequences as described above.
Accidents like this get reported to the Federal Drugs Administration (FDA). The FDA requested the manufacturer to take appropriate measures. The fix suggested was as follows:
Effective immediately, and until further notice, the key used for moving the cursor back through the prescription sequence (i.e. cursor UP inscribed with an upward pointing arrow) must not be used for editing or any other purpose.
To avoid accidental use of this key, the key cap must be removed and the switch contacts fixed in the open position with electrical tape or other insulating material. . . .
Disabling this key means that if any prescription data entered is incorrect then an R reset command must be used and the whole prescription reentered.
The FDA did not buy this remedy. In particular, they judged the tone of the notification not commensurate with the urgency for doing so. The discussion between the FDA and the manufacturer continued for quite some time before an adequate response was given to this and other failures of the Therac-25.
The Therac-25 machine and its software evolved from earlier models that were less sophisticated. In earlier versions of the software, for example, it was not possible to move up and down the screen to change individual fields. Operators noticed that different treatments often required almost the same data, which had to be keyed in all over again. To enhance usability, the feature to move the cursor around and change individual fields was added. Apparently, user friendliness may conflict with safety.
In earlier models also, the correct position of the turntable and other equipment was ensured by simple electromechanical interlocks. These interlocks are a common mechanism to ensure safety. For instance, they are used in lifts to make sure that the doors cannot be opened if the lift is in between floors. In the Therac-25, these mechanical safety devices were replaced by software. The software was thus made into a single point of failure. This overconfidence in software contributed to the Therac-25 accidents, together with inadequate software engineering practices and an inadequate reaction of management to incidents.
1.4.3	The London Ambulance Service
The London Ambulance Service (LAS) handles the ambulance traffic in Greater London. It covers an area of over 600 square miles and carries over 5000 patients per day in 750 vehicles. The LAS receives over 2000 phone calls per day, including more than 1300 emergency calls. The system we discuss here is a computer-aided dispatch (CAD) system. Such a CAD system has the following functionality:
it handles call taking, accepts and verifies incident details including the location of the incident; it determines which ambulance to send;
it handles the mobilization of the ambulance and communicates the details of the incident to the ambulance;
it takes care of ambulance resource management, in particular the positioning of vehicles to minimize response times.
A fully-fledged CAD system is quite complex. In panic, someone might call and say that an accident has happened in front of Foyles, assuming that everyone knows where this bookshop is located. An extensive gazetteer component including a public telephone identification helps in solving this type of problem. The CAD system also contains a radio system, mobile terminals in the ambulances, and an automatic vehicle location system.
The CAD project of the London Ambulance Service was started in the autumn of 1990. The delivery was scheduled for January 1992. At that time, however, the software was still far from complete. Over the first nine months of 1992, the system was installed piecemeal across a number of different LAS divisions, but it was never stable. On 26 and 27 October 1992, there were serious problems with the system and it was decided to revert to a semi-manual mode of operation. On 4 November 1992, the system crashed. The Regional Health Authority established an Inquiry Team to investigate the failures and the history that led to them. They came up with an 80-page report, which reads like a suspense novel. Below, we highlight some of the issues raised in this report.
The envisaged CAD system would be a major undertaking. No other emergency service had attempted to go as far. The plan was to move from a wholly manual process -- in which forms were filled in and transported from one employee to the next via a conveyor belt -- to complete automation, in one shot. The scheme was very ambitious. The participants seem not to have fully realized the risks they were taking.
Way before the project actually started, a management consultant firm had already been asked for advice. They suggested that a packaged solution would cost $1.5M and take 19 months. Their report also stated that if a package solution could not be found, the estimates should be significantly increased. Eventually, a non-package solution was chosen, but only the numbers from this report were remembered, or so it seems.
The advertisement resulted in replies from 35 companies. The specification and timetable were next discussed with these companies. The proposed timetable was 11 months (this is not a typo). Though many suppliers raised concerns about the timetable, they were told that it was non-negotiable. Eventually, 17 suppliers provided full proposals. The lowest tender, at approximately $1M, was selected. This tender was about $700 000 cheaper than the next lowest bid. No one seems to have questioned this huge difference. The proposal selected superficially suggests that the company had experience in designing systems for emergency services. This was not a lie: they had developed administrative systems for such services. The LAS system also was far larger than anything they had previously handled.
The proposed system would impact quite significantly on the way ambulance crews carried out their jobs. It would therefore be paramount to have their full cooperation. If the crews did not press the right buttons at the right time and in the right order, chaos could result. Yet, there was very little user involvement during the requirements engineering process.
The intended CAD system would operate in an absolutely objective and impartial way and would always mobilize the optimum resource to any incident. This would overcome many of the then present working practices which management considered outmoded and not in the interest of LAS. For instance, the new system would allocate the nearest available resource regardless of the originating station. The following scenario may result:
Johns crew has to go to an accident a few miles east of their home base.
Once there, they are directed to a hospital a few miles further east to deliver the patient.
Another call comes in and John happens to be nearest. He is ordered to travel yet a few miles further east.
And so on.
In this way, crews may have to operate further and further away from their home base, and in unfamiliar territory. They lose time, because they take wrong turns, or may even have to stop to ask for directions. They also have further to travel to reach their home station at the end of a shift. Crews didnt like this aspect of the new system.
The new system also took away the flexibility local emergency stations had in deciding which resource to allocate. In the new scheme, resource management was fully centralized and handled by the system. So, suppose John runs down to where the ambulances are parked and the computer has ordered him to take car number 5. John is in a hurry and maybe he cannot quickly spot car number 5, or maybe it is parked behind some other cars. So John thinks about this patient waiting for him and decides to take car number 4 instead. This means trouble.
The people responsible for those requirements were misguided or naive in believing that computer systems in themselves can bring about such changes in human practices. Computers are there to help people do their job, not vice versa. Operational straitjackets are doomed to fail.
The eventual crash on 4 November 1992 was caused by a minor programming error. Some three weeks earlier, a programmer had been working on part of the system and forgot to remove a small piece of program text. The code in itself did no harm. However, it did allocate a small amount of memory every time a vehicle mobilization was generated by the system. This memory was not deallocated. After three weeks, all memory was used up and the system crashed.
The LAS project as a whole did not fail because of this programmer mistake. That was just the last straw. The project schedule was far too tight. Management of both the London Ambulance Service and the contractor had little or no experience with software development projects of this size and complexity. They were far too optimistic in their assessment of risks. They assumed that all the people who would interact with the system, would do so in exactly the right way, all of the time. They assumed the hardware parts of the system would work exactly as specified. Management decided on the functionality of the system, with hardly any consultation with the people that would be its primary users. Any project with such characteristics is doomed to fail. From the very first day.
1.4.4	Who Counts the Votes?
Its not who votes that counts, its who counts the votes Josef Stalin
Traditional, non-automated election systems leave a paper trail that can be used for auditing purposes: have all votes been counted, have they been counted correctly.
Such an audit is done by an independent party. These safeguards serve to build trust in the outcome.
But what if these elections are supported by computers? As a voter, you then simply press a button. But what next? The recording and counting is hidden. How do you know your vote is not tinkered with? How can fraud be avoided? For the individual, one then needs a voter ballot, for instance a piece of paper similar to an ATM receipt, that serves to verify the voters choice. The ballots of all voters may next be used in an independent audit of the election outcome. Most automated election systems of today do not provide these safeguards.
What if we go one step further, and provide our voters with a web application to place their votes? Below is a story about a real system of this kind. The application was developed in Java. Due to governmental regulations, the voting model implemented mimicked the traditional one. The application maintains a voting register containing identifications of all voters, and a ballot box in which the votes are stored. One of the regulations that the system had to comply with is anonymity: a vote in the ballot box should not be traceable to a name in the voters register. Another regulation concenrs security: both registers have to be stored separately.
The technical design envisaged two separate databases, one for the voters and one for the ballots. Placing a vote and marking a voter as has voted should be performed in a single transaction: either both actions are done, or neither of them. This design would cater for the correctness requirement: the number of votes in the ballot box equals the number of voters being marked has voted.
At least, this is what we hoped for. Tests of the system though showed that, seemingly at haphazard moments in time, there were more votes in the ballot box than there were voters marked as has voted. So the system allowed voters more than one vote.
Taking a look under the hood, a coding error was revealed in the voting process. Part of the algorithm ran as follows:
1.	Identify the voter.
2.	Match the voter with an entry in the register.
3.	If a match is found, check that (s)he has not voted yet. The test in the latter step had the form
instead of
In other words, references were compared, rather than actual values. This is one way to win the elections.
 
1.5. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING ETHICS
1.5	Software Engineering Ethics
Suppose you are testing part of a big software system. You find quite a few errors and youre certainly not ready to deliver. However, your manager is pressing you. The schedule has already slipped by quite a few weeks. Your manager in turn is pressed by his boss. The customer is eagerly awaiting delivery of the system. Your manager suggests that you should deliver the system as is, continue testing, and replace the system by a better version within the next month. How would you react to this scheme? Would you simply give in? Argue with your manager? Go to his boss? Go to the customer?
The development of complex software systems involves many people: software developers, testers, technical managers, general managers, customers, etc. Within this temporary organization, the relationship between individuals is often asymmetrical: one person participating in the relationship has more knowledge about something than the other. For example, a software developer has more knowledge about the system under construction than his manager. Such an asymmetric relationship asks for trust: if the developer says that development of some component is on schedule, his manager cannot but believe this message. At least for a while. Such reliance provides opportunities for unethical behavior, such as embezzlement. This is the more so if there also is a power relationship between these individuals.
It is not surprising then that people within the software engineering community have been discussing a software engineering code of ethics. Two large organizations of professionals in our field, the IEEE Computer Society and ACM, have jointly developed such a code. The short version of this code is given in figure 1.5.
In the long version of the code, each of the principles is further refined into a set of clauses. Some of these clauses are statements of aspiration: for example, a software engineer should strive to fully understand the specifications of the software on which he works. Aspirations direct professional behavior. They require significant ethical judgment. Other clauses express obligations of professionals in general: for example, a software engineer should, like any other professional, provide service only in areas of his competence. A third type of clause is directed at specific professional behavior within software engineering: for example, a software engineer should ensure realistic estimates of the cost and schedule of any project on which he works.
There are a number of clauses which bear upon the situation of the tester mentioned above:
Approve software only if you have a well-founded belief that it is safe, meets specifications, passes appropriate tests, and does not diminish quality of life or privacy or harm the environment (clause 1.03 ).
Ensure adequate testing, debugging, and review of software and related documents on which you work (clause 3.10).
 
Preamble
The short version of the code summarizes aspirations at a high level of abstraction. The clauses that are included in the full version give examples and details of how these aspirations change the way we act as software engineering professionals. Without the aspirations, the details can become legalistic and tedious; without the details, the aspirations can become high sounding but empty; together, the aspirations and the details form a cohesive code.
Software engineers shall commit themselves to making the analysis, specification, design, development, testing and maintenance of software a beneficial and respected profession. In accordance with their commitment to the health, safety and welfare of the public, software engineers shall adhere to the following Eight Principles:
1.	Public. Software engineers shall act consistently with the public interest
2.	Client and employer. Software engineers shall act in a manner that is in the best interests of their client and employer consistent with the public interest
3.	Product. Software engineers shall ensure that their products and related modifications meet the highest professional standards possible
4.	Judgment. Software engineers shall maintain integrity and independence in their professional judgment
5.	Management. Software engineering managers and leaders shall subscribe to and promote an ethical approach to the management of software development and maintenance
6.	Profession. Software engineers shall advance the integrity and reputation of the profession consistent with the public interest
7.	Colleagues.	Software	engineers	shall	be	fair	to	and	supportive	of	their colleagues
8.	Self. Software engineers shall participate in lifelong learning regarding the practice of their profession and shall promote an ethical approach to the practice of the profession
 
	Figure 1.5	Software engineering code of ethics
As a manager, do not ask a software engineer to do anything inconsistent with this code of ethics (clause 5.11).
Be accurate in stating the characteristics of software on which you work, avoiding not only false claims but also claims that might be supposed to be speculative, vacuous, deceptive, misleading, or doubtful (clause 6.07).
1.6. QUO VADIS?
The code is not a simple algorithm to discriminate between acceptable and unacceptable behavior. Rather, the principles stated should influence you, as a software engineer, to consider who is affected by your work. The software you develop affects the public. The health, safety and welfare of the public is the primary concern of this code of ethics. Adhering to this, or a similar, code of ethics is not something to merely consider on a Friday afternoon. It should become a way of life.
The code not only addresses software engineers. It also addresses managers, in that the code indicates what might reasonably be expected from professional software engineers.
1.6	Quo Vadis?
A lot of progress has been made over the past 30 years. For each of the major phases, numerous techniques and tools have been developed. A number of these have found widespread use. In their assessment of design and coding practices for example, DeMarco and Lister found that a number of widely acclaimed techniques (such as the use of small units, strong component binding and structured programming) are indeed applied in practice and pay off (DeMarco and Lister, 1989). However, the short sketches in the preceding section (and the more elaborate discussion in the following chapters) show that a lot of research is still needed to make software engineering into a truly mature engineering discipline.
It takes some time before technology developed in research laboratories gets applied in a routine way. This holds for physical products such as the transistor, but also for methods, techniques, and tools in the area of software technology. The first version of the UNIX operating system goes right back to 1971. Only since the late 1980s, has interest in UNIX spread widely. In the early 1960s, studies of the cost of software were first made. In the 1980s there was a growing interest in quantitative models for estimating software costs (see also the later chapter on cost estimation). Dijkstras article on programming as a human activity appeared in 1965. In the late 1970s the first introductory textbooks on structured programming were published. The term software engineering was introduced in 1968. In the 1980s large national and international programs were initiated to foster the transition of this new technology. The above list can be extended with many other examples (Redwine and Riddle, 1985). This maturation process generally takes at least 10 to 15 years.
In a seminal article entitled No silver bullet: essence and accidents of software engineering, Brooks (1987) discusses a number of potentially fruitful approaches to dramatically increase software productivity. His main conclusion is: there is no silver bullet. But we need not be afraid of the werewolf either. By a careful study of the many innovations and an investigation of their true merits, a lot of improvements in both quality and productivity can be achieved. The remainder of this text is devoted to a critical assessment of these technological and non-technological developments. Several relatively recent developments have a dramatic impact on the field:
The rise of agile methods. As noted before in this chapter, the term software engineering induces an orderly, factory-like approach to software development. This ignores the fact that for many a project, it is impossible to state the requirements upfront. They emerge as we go along. Armour (2001) compares traditional software development with shooting down a Zeppelin, and agile approaches with shooting down a supersonic plane. To shoot down a Zeppelin, we collect information on altitude, distance, velocity and the like, relay this information to the gun, aim, and shoot. This approach does not work for supersonic planes. We do not know where the intercept will be, and the missile will have to change direction while in the air. It is a challenge to try to successfully combine engineering and craft-like approaches to software development.
There is shift from producing software to using software. Time-to-market, cost, and sheer complexity encourage organizations to assemble systems out of existing components, rather than developing those components from scratch. On one hand, builders build (pieces of) software, on the other hand integrators integrate those pieces into end-user applications. As one consequence, consumers of software often do not talk to developers anymore. Requirements come from a variety of other sources, such as helpdesk call-log analysis or market research (Sawyer, 2001). To the consumer, the software development process is not interesting any more, only the resulting product counts. This shift has given rise to new topics within software engineering, such as ComponentBased Software Development (CBSD), Commercial Off-The-Shelve (COTS) components, Software Product Lines (SPL), and services.
Software development is becoming more heterogeneous. In the old days, a software development organization had everything under control. Or so it thought. Nowadays, software is being developed by teams scattered across the globe. Part of it may be outsourced to a different organization. Software incorporates components acquired from some other supplier, or services found on the Web. As a consequence, one is not in control anymore.
To close this chapter is a list of important periodicals that contain material which is relevant to the field of software engineering:
	Transactions on Software Engineering (IEEE), a monthly periodical in which research results are reported;
	Software (IEEE), a bimonthly journal which is somewhat more general in scope;
	Software Engineering Notes, a bimonthly newsletter from the ACM Special Interest Group on Software Engineering;
	Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (ACM), a quarterly journal which reports research results.
1.7. SUMMARY
	The Journal of Systems and Software (Elsevier), a monthly journal covering both research papers and reports of practical experiences;
	Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering (ACM/IEEE), proceedings of the most important international conference in the field, organized every year;
	Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Maintenance (IEEE), organized yearly;
	Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and Practice (Wiley), bimonthly journal devoted to topics in software maintenance and evolution.
1.7	Summary
Software engineering is concerned with the problems that have to do with the construction of large programs. When developing such programs, a phased approach is followed. First, the problem is analyzed, and then the system is designed, implemented and tested. This practice has a lot in common with the engineering of physical products. Hence the term software engineering. Software engineering, however, also differs from the engineering of physical products in some essential ways.
Software models part of the real world surrounding us, like banking or the reservation of airline seats. This world around us changes over time. So the corresponding software has to change too. It has to evolve together with the changing reality. Much of what we call software maintenance, actually is concerned with ensuring that the software keeps pace with the real world being modeled.
We thus get a process model in which we iterate earlier phases from time to time. We speak about the software life cycle.
Agile methods, reuse of components, and globalisation are some of the relatively recent trends that have a huge impact on the way we view the field. There is a shift from producing software to using software. A major consequence hereof is that a development organization looses control over what it delivers.
1.8	Further Reading
Johnson (1998) describes the early history of the software industry. The more recent state of the practice is described in (Software, 2003).
For a more elaborate discussion of the differences and similarities between software engineering and a mature engineering discipline, viz. bridge design, see (Spector and Gifford, 1986). (Leveson, 1992) compares software engineering with the development of high-pressure steam engines.
The four kinds of maintenance activities stem from (Lientz and Swanson, 1980).
The Ariane failure is described in (Jezequel and Meyer, 1997). I found the report of the Inquiry Team at	  .
An elaborate discussion of the Therac-25 accidents can be found in (Leveson and Turner, 1993). The Inquiry into the London Ambulance Service is described in (Page et al., 1993). (Neumann, 1995) is a book wholly devoted to computer-related risks. The bimonthly ACM Software Engineering Notes contains a column Risks to the public in computer systems, edited by Peter Neumann, which reports on large and small catastrophes caused by automation. (Flowers, 1996) is a collection of stories about information systems that failed, including the LAS system. (Kohno et al., 2004) and (Raba, 2004) discuss problems with one specific electronic voting system. (Petroski, 1994) is a wonderful book on failures in engineering. (Software, 1999) is a special issue with stories about successful IT projects.
The ACM/IEEE Software Engineering code of ethics is discussed in (Gotterbarn,
	1999). The text of the code can also be found at	.
(Epstein, 1997) is a collection of (fictional) stories addressing the interaction between ethics and software engineering. (Oz, 1994) discusses ethical questions of a real-life project.
Exercises
1.	Define the term software engineering.
2.	What are the essential characteristics of software engineering?
3.	What are the major phases in a software development project?
4.	What is the difference between verification and validation?
5.	Define four kinds of maintenance activity.
6.	Why is the documentation of a software project important?
7.	Explain the 40--20--40 rule of thumb in software engineering.
8.	What is the difference between software development and software maintenance?
9.	Do you think the linear model of software development is appropriate? In which cases do you think an agile approach is more appropriate? You may wish to reconsider this issue after having read the remainder of this text.
10.	Discuss the major differences between software engineering and some other engineering discipline, such as bridge design or house building. Would you consider state-of-the-art software engineering as a true engineering discipline?
11.	Quality and productivity are major issues in software engineering. It is
1.8. FURTHER READING
often advocated that automated tools (CASE tools) will dramatically improve both quality and productivity. Study a commercial CASE tool and assess the extent to which it improves the software development process and its outcome.
12.	Medical doctors have their Hippocratic oath. Could a similar ethical commitment by software engineers be instrumental in increasing the quality of software systems?
13.	Suppose you are involved in an office automation project in the printing industry. The system to be developed is meant to support the work of journal editors. The management objective for this project is to save labor cost; the editors objective is to increase the quality of their work. Discuss possible ramifications of these opposing objectives on the project. You may come back to this question after having read chapter 9 or (Hirschheim and Klein, 1989).
14.	Discuss the difference between requirements-based software development and market-driven software development (Sawyer, 2001).
15.	Discuss the impact of globalisation on software development.
16.	Study both the technical and user documentation of a system at your disposal. Are you satisfied with them? Discuss their possible shortcomings and give remedies to improve their quality.
17.	Take a piece of software you wrote more than a year ago. Is it documented adequately? Does it have a user manual? Is the design rationale reflected in the technical documentation? Can you build an understanding of the system from its documentation that is sufficient for making non-trivial changes to it? Repeat these questions for a system written by one of your colleagues.
18.	Try to gather quantitative data from your organization that reveals how much effort is spent on various kinds of maintenance activity. Are these data available at all? If so, is the pattern like that sketched in section 1.3? If not, can you explain the differences?
19.	A 1999 Computer Society survey lists the following candidate fundamental principles of software engineering:
A.	Apply and use quantitative measurements in decision-making.
B.	Build with and for reuse.
C.	Control	complexity	with	multiple	perspectives	and	multiple	levels	of abstraction.
D.	Define software artifacts rigorously.

E.	Establish a software process that provides flexibility.
F.	Implement a disciplined approach and improve it continuously.
G.	Invest in the understanding of the problem.
H.	Manage quality throughout the life cycle as formally as possible.
I.	Minimize software components interaction.
J.	Produce software in a stepwise fashion.
K.	Set quality objectives for each deliverable product.
L.	Since change is inherent to software, plan for it and manage it.
M.	Since tradeoffs are inherent to software engineering, make them explicit and document them.
N.	To improve design, study previous solutions to similar problems.
O.	Uncertainty is unavoidable in software engineering. Identify and manage it.
For each of these principles, indicate whether you (strongly) agree or (strongly) disagree, and why. You may wish to re-appraise these principles after having studied the rest of this book.
 
Part I
Software Management
CONTENTS
Chapter 2	Introduction to Software Engineering Management	34
Chapter 3	The Software Life Cycle Revisited	45
Chapter 4	Configuration Management	78
Chapter 5	People Management and Team Organization	89
Chapter 6	On Managing Software Quality	107
Chapter 7	Cost Estimation	144
Chapter 8	Project Planning and Control	176
Software development projects often involve several people for a prolonged period of time. Large projects may even range over several years and involve hundreds of people. Such projects must be carefully planned and controlled. The main aspects that deserve the continuous attention of project managers are introduced in chapter 2, and further dealt with in chapters 3--7: progress, information, people, quality, cost and schedule. The management part ends with chapter 8 in which the various approaches sketched in chapters 3--7 are reconciled.
2 Introduction to Software Engineering Management
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To be aware of the contents of a project plan
To understand the major dimensions along which a software development project is controlled
Software development projects often involve several people for a prolonged period of time. Large projects may even range over several years and involve hundreds of people. Such projects must be carefully planned and controlled. The main aspects that deserve the continuous attention of project managers are introduced in this chapter.
It is not easy to complete successfully a software development project. This book mainly deals with technical aspects of software development: design, specification, implementation and testing of software systems. As we learn to control these aspects better, we will also learn to satisfy our customers demands better. The organizational and managerial aspects of software development projects are at least as important as the technical aspects, though.
Before we embark on a discussion of these organizational and managerial aspects, let us first pay some attention to the boundaries of a software development project as they are drawn in this book.
A software development project is usually not started in complete isolation. There are other projects within the organization that this particular project needs to be tuned to, priorities between projects have to be decided upon, etc. The term information planning is often used to refer to this meta-project planning process.
Also in a more technical sense, projects are not started in isolation. To increase interoperability between systems, overall guidelines regarding, e.g., the use of certain standards, data interchange formats, security policies, web page layout and the like are laid down for the whole organization and imposed on every project. In product line development, the architecture of the product line guides the development of individual products.
These project exceeding rules result in a set of boundary conditions for each project, much like the zoning regulations set the conditions for a building project. Establishing these company-wide rules is a problem on its own, and will not be addressed here. (We will, however, pay ample attention to some issues which generally surpass the boundaries of individual software development projects, such as configuration control, quality assurance and product line development.)
Also in a more technical sense, software is not generally developed in isolation. In most cases, software is not written from scratch. It must interface with existing software, extend existing software, use existing subroutine libraries, build upon an existing framework, and so on.
In some sense, the notion of a software development project is a misnomer. We do not just develop software, we develop systems. Broadly speaking, a system transforms inputs into outputs. Software is an important ingredient of the systems we develop, but it is by no means the only ingredient. The technical and user documentation, the hardware, the procedures that govern the use of the system, and even the people using the software, may be considered as part of that same system.
Consider for example a system for library automation. The system will contain
 
various software components, such as a database component to store information on books and customers and an interaction component to process user requests. As well as the development of these components, attention should be paid to matters like: techniques to identify books electronically, such as a barcode scheme;
the selection and acquisition of special hardware both for scanning those identifications and for producing identifications for new books; setting up a scheme to provide all books with the new identification code;
instruction of library employees to handle the new types of equipment (training material and courses, operating procedures, and the like); production of user-friendly documentation for the library customers.
web-accessibility issues, such as whether the catalog can be browsed, or books can be reserved on-line
Whenever the notion software development project is used in the following, it should be understood in this wider sense. This is graphically illustrated in figure 2.1.
 
	Figure 2.1	The systems view of a software development project
Thus, our systems encompass a number of components. In a narrow sense, the software component itself may also consist of a number of interacting components. These latter components correspond to programs as we know them from introductory
2.1. PLANNING A SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
computer science textbooks. In general, a software development project results in a set of components which collectively provide us with the desired functionality.
Given a projects boundary conditions, a software development project may get started. Planning the project is the very first step to be undertaken. Part of this planning process is to identify the project characteristics and their impact on the development process. The result of the planning phase is laid down in a document, the project plan, which aims to provide a clear picture of the project to both the customers and the development team. The contents of the project plan are discussed in section 2.1.
During the execution of the project, a number of elements have to be managed: time, information, organization, quality, and money (see section 2.2). Each of these elements is further elaborated upon in a separate chapter.
2.1	Planning a Software Development Project
Before we embark on a software development project, it has to be carefully planned. This entails, amongst other things, an assessment of project properties that may affect the development process. A number of properties, however, will not be sufficiently well understood until the requirements engineering phase has ended. Like many other aspects of a software development project, planning is not a one-shot activity. Rather, it is highly dynamic in nature. The project plan can serve as a guide during the project.
The amount of upfront planning depends on characteristics of the problem at hand. In highly explorative projects, where requirements are largely unknown at the start, too rigorous early planning can be stifling and may increase the probability of major failures. A strict plan the work and work the plan attitude does not work in these circumstances. Rather, such projects call for a nominal early planning and a management style that encourages responding to change. This is reflected in the contents and size of the project plan. Chapters 3 and 8 further discuss differences between the so-called agile and planning-driven approaches to software development. The major constituents of a project plan are:
1.	Introduction In the introduction to the project plan, the background and history of the project are given, together with its aims, the project deliverables, the names of the persons responsible, and a summary of the project.
2.	Process model In chapter 1, we introduced a simple life cycle model in order to discuss the various activities to be dealt with in a software development project. There exist many variations of this process model, some of which are discussed in chapter 3. For each project, one has to decide upon the exact process model to be followed: which activities are being undertaken, which milestones can be identified, how do we ascertain whether those milestones are reached, and which are the critical paths.
Different types of projects have different characteristics, and so call for different process models.
3.	Organization of the project The relationship of the project to other entities and the organization of the project itself are dealt with under this heading. The project will have a relationship with the user organization, the parent organization, and possibly with other organizations.
The prospective users will from time to time be involved in the project. The project plan has to state which information, services, resources and facilities are to be provided by the users and when these are to be provided.
Within the project team, various roles can be identified: project manager, tester, programmer, analyst, etc. One has to clearly delineate these roles and identify the responsibilities of each of them. If there are gaps in the knowledge required to fulfill any of these roles, the training and education needed to fill these gaps have to be identified. Different forms of team organization are discussed in chapter 5.
4.	Standards, guidelines, procedures Software projects are big projects. Usually, a lot of people are involved. A strong working discipline is therefore needed, in which each person involved follows the standards, guidelines and procedures agreed upon. Besides being stated on paper, many of these can be supported or enforced by tools. Of extreme importance are clear agreements about documentation: when is documentation to be delivered, how is the quality of the documentation to be assessed, how does one ensure that the documentation is kept up-to-date?
To a large extent, these standards and procedures will be described in separate documents, such as the Configuration Control Plan or the Quality Assurance Plan.
5.	Management activities Management activities are guided by goals and priorities set for the project. For example, management will have to submit regular reports on the status and progress of the project. It will also have to follow certain priorities in balancing requirements, schedule and cost.
6.	Risks Potential risks have to be identified as early as possible. There will always be risks: hardware may not be delivered on time, qualified personnel may not be available when required, critical information may be lacking when it is needed, and so on. It is rather naive to suppose that a software development project runs smoothly. Even in well-established fields like construction, there is always something that goes wrong. One should diagnose the risks of a software project early on, and provide measures to deal with them; see also chapter 8.
The more uncertain various aspects of the project are, the larger the risks.
2.1. PLANNING A SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
7.	Staffing At different points in time, the project will require different amounts of personnel, with different skills. The start, duration, amount and expertise of personnel categories are listed under this heading.
8.	Methods and techniques Under this heading, the methods and techniques to be used during requirements engineering, design, implementation and testing are given. Typically, the way version and configuration control for software components is dealt with is described here too. A large proportion of the technical documentation will be produced during these phases. One thus has to state how this documentation will be taken care of.
The necessary test environment and test equipment is described. During testing, considerable pressure will normally be put on the test equipment. Therefore, this activity has to be planned carefully. The order in which components are integrated and tested has to be stated explicitly. Also, the procedures to be followed during acceptance testing, i.e. the testing under user supervision, have to be given. Testing will be discussed in chapter 13.
9.	Quality assurance Which organization and procedures will be used to assure that the software being developed meets the quality requirements stated? The many aspects of a Quality Assurance Plan may also be dealt with in a separate document. The topic of quality assurance is discussed in chapter 6.
10.	Work packages Larger projects must be broken down into activities, manageable pieces that can be allocated to individual team members. Each of these activities has to be identified in the project plan. The hierarchical decomposition of the project is depicted in a work breakdown structure (see also section
8.4).
11.	Resources During the project, many resources are needed. The hardware, CPU-cycles and tools needed to support the project are listed under this entry. One should also indicate the personnel needed for the various process phases.
12.	Budget and schedule The total budget for the project has to be allocated to the various activities as indicated in the work breakdown structure. The activities also have to be scheduled in time, e.g. using a PERT chart (see section 8.4). The way in which resources and other expenditures are tracked is also indicated under this heading. The topic of cost and time estimation will be dealt with extensively in chapter 7.
13.	Changes It has been stated before that changes are inevitable. One has to ensure that these changes are dealt with in an orderly way. One thus needs clear procedures on how proposed changes will be handled. If the process is agile, every iteration involves changes, and these are dealt with in a lightweight manner. In fact, they are not seen as changes anymore. In more heavyweight processes, each proposed change must be registered and reviewed. When a change request has been approved, its impact (cost) has to be estimated. Finally, the change has to be incorporated into the project. Changes that are entered via the back door lead to badly structured code, insufficient documentation and cost and time overruns. Since changes lead to different versions of both documentation and code, the procedures to be followed in dealing with such changes are often handled in the context of a Configuration Control Plan.
14.	Delivery The procedures to be followed in handing over the system to the customer must be stated.
The project plan aims to provide a clear picture of the project to both the customers and the project team. If the objectives are not clear, they will not be achieved.
Despite careful planning, surprises will still crop up during the project. However, careful planning early on leads to fewer surprises and makes one less vulnerable to these surprises. The project plan addresses a number of questions which anticipate possible future events. It gives orderly procedures for dealing with those events, so that justifiable decisions can be reached.
2.2	Controlling a Software Development Project
After a project plan has been drawn up and approved, the execution of the project may start. During the project, control has to be exerted along the following dimensions:
	time,
	information,
	organization,
	quality, 	money.
Progress of a software development project (the time aspect) is hard to measure. Before the proposed system has been finished, there is only a (large) pile of paper. Utterances such as 90% of the code has been written should be taken with a pinch of salt. A much too rosy picture of the actual state of affairs is usually given. The phased approach introduced in chapter 1, and its variants, aim at providing the manager with an instrument to measure and control progress. The time needed to build a system is obviously related to the size of the system, and thus to the total manpower required. Larger systems require more time to develop, although we may try to shorten development time by allocating more personnel. Part of the control problem for software development projects is to trade off time against people. Adding more people to shorten development time does not come for free. The more people that are involved, the more time will be needed for coordination and communication. After a certain point, adding more people actually lengthens the development time.
2.2. CONTROLLING A SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
Part of the time control problem is phrased in Brooks Law: Adding people to a late project only makes it later. We will come back to this issue in the chapter on cost estimation.
The information that has to be managed, above all, is the documentation. Besides technical and user documentation, this also entails documentation on the project itself. Documentation concerning the project includes such things as: the current state of affairs, changes that have been agreed upon, and decisions that have been made. This type of documentation can best be handled in the context of configuration management. In agile projects, less attention is given to documentation during development. Necessary knowledge is tacit, it resides in the heads of the people involved. But here too, once the system is ready and handed over to its customers, documentation has to be provided.
All members of the development team must understand their role in the team and what is expected of them. It is very important that these expectations are clear to all people involved. Unspoken and unclear expectations lead to situations in which individual team members set their own goals, either consciously or unconsciously. These organizational aspects deserve the continuous attention of the project manager. Secondly, the organization of a team and the coordination of the people involved will, at least partly, depend upon characteristics of the project and its environment. This dependence has to be recognized and taken into account when setting up a project team.
The quality aspect is of paramount importance. Customers are not satisfied with the purely technical solutions offered by computer specialists. They want systems that fit their real needs. The quality requirements for software and its development often conflict with one another. At architecture time, quality requirements are balanced in a dialog with all stakeholders involved. During a project we will have to assess whether or not the quality requirements are being met. This quality assessment has to occur on a regular basis, so that timely actions can be undertaken. Quality is not an add-on feature, it has to be built in.
Controlling expenses (the money aspect) largely means controlling labor costs. Though the cost of hardware and tools cannot be ignored, these can usually be estimated fairly precisely early in the project. Moreover, these are usually much less of an issue than personnel costs.
Estimating the cost of software thus means that we must estimate the manpower required to build the software. The manpower needed is very much dependent on the size of the software, for instance measured as the amount of code to be delivered. Many other factors, though, influence this cost or, alternatively, the productivity with which the software can be produced. A well-balanced team with experienced people will be much more productive than a newly-formed team with inexperienced people. Extremely strict quality constraints, such as very high reliability or a very fast response time, may also severely reduce productivity.
A number of models have been proposed that try to quantify the effect of those different cost drivers on the manpower required (see chapter 7). Rather than estimating the size first, and then its cost, one may also set a cost threshold first, and work incrementally, first on the most pressing user requirements and, if time allows, on less pressing ones. Or one may agree on a first threshold, and decide whether more money will be spent when this threshold is reached. These incremental approaches to cost estimation fit in well with agile project development.
Software development is a very labor-intensive process. One of our hopes is that better tools and the increased use of those tools will lead to a significant increase in productivity and, consequently, a significant decrease in the cost involved in developing software. A second way, to increase productivity dramatically, is to use software rather than build it yourself. Both these topics will be discussed in chapters to follow. As these trends continue, software development starts to become a capital-intensive activity, rather than a labor-intensive one (Wegner, 1984).
Continuous assessment of the project with respect to these control aspects is of the utmost importance and will from time to time lead to adjustments in time, cost, organization, information, or quality, or some combination thereof. Project management is a very dynamic activity.
In order to be able to adequately control a project, we need quantitative data which is collected while the project is being executed. For instance, data about errors discovered during unit testing may help us in estimating further test effort needed. Data about the time and effort spent up to a specific point will guide us in re-estimating the schedule and cost. To measure is to know.
These data are also valuable in a post-mortem evaluation of the project. In a postmortem evaluation we assess the present project in order to improve our performance on projects yet to come: what have we done wrong, what have we learned, what needs to be done differently on the next project?
Unfortunately, in practice very little hard data is ever gathered, let alone retained for later use. Most software development organizations have little insight into what they are doing. They tend to operate in a somewhat chaotic way, especially when facing a crisis. By identifying key factors that affect the controllability of the software development process, we may find ways to improve on it. This topic is further treated in chapter 6, where we discuss the Software Capability Maturity Model.
2.3	Summary
This chapter provides an introduction to the management of software engineering projects.
Before we embark on a software development project, it has to be carefully planned. This planning process results in a document, the project plan, which provides a clear picture of the project to both the customers and the project team.
Once the project plan has been drawn up and the project has started, its execution must be controlled. We identified five entities that require our continuous attention for project control:
2.3. SUMMARY
Time: How do we assess progress towards the projects goals? Usually, some phased approach is followed which aims to provide management with a means to measure and control progress.
Information: How do we handle the documents that are produced in the course of a project? In planning-based development, maintaining the integrity of the set of documents and handling all change requests require careful procedures.
Organization: How do we organize the project team and coordinate the activities of team members?
Quality: How do we define and assess quality requirements for both the development process and the resulting product?
Money: How do we estimate the cost of a project? These costs are to a large extent determined by the size of the software.
Each of these controlling aspects is further elaborated upon in a separate chapter (chapters 3--7). The various dimensions of project control will then be reconciled in chapter 8.
Exercises
1.	In what sense is the phrase software development project a misnomer?
2.	What are the major constituents of a project plan?
3.	List five dimensions along which a software development project has to be controlled.
4.	How may software development become a capital-intensive activity, rather than a labor-intensive one?
5.	Consider a software development project you have been involved in. Did the project have a project plan? Did the project plan address the issues listed in section 2.1? If some of these issues were not addressed, do you think it would have helped the project if they had been?
6.	Do you think quantitative project data are important? In what way can they contribute to project planning?
7.	How would a project plan for an agile project differ from that of a planning-driven project?
8.	Consider once again a software development project you have been involved in. To what extent were any environmental issues such as user training and working procedures adequately dealt with in the project?

9. A program written for personal use imposes rather less stringent requirements than a product that is also to be used by other people. According to (Brooks, 1995), the latter may require three times as much effort. Discuss possible reasons for this considerable increase in cost.
 
3 The Software Life Cycle Revisited
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To be aware of a number of generic models to structure the software development process
To appreciate the pros and cons of these models, in particular those of the classes of planning-driven and agile methods
To understand	the similarities between software maintenance	and	software evolution
To recognize that it is profitable to apply software product line engineering when developing a series of similar systems
To be aware of process modeling as a way to describe software development processes explicitly
To be able to assess progress during software development, one opts for a phased approach with a number of well-defined milestone events. The linear ordering of activities which underlies the traditional software development model, the waterfall model, renders it an impossible idealization of reality though. It assumes software development proceeds in an orderly, sequential manner. Real projects proceed in far less rational ways. The waterfall model of software development is not feasible, much like Eschers Waterfall, reproduced on the front cover, is unfeasible. This chapter discusses various alternative models of the development process.
In chapter 1, we introduced a simple model of the software life cycle. We distinguished several consecutive phases: requirements engineering, design, implementation, testing, maintenance. It was stated that, in practice, one often uses more sophisticated process models. In this chapter we continue this discussion. We introduce various alternative models to structure the software development process.
Software development projects are often very large projects. A number of people work on such a project for a long time and therefore the whole process needs to be carefully planned and controlled: progress needs to be monitored, people and resources need to be allocated at the right point in time, etc. Earlier on, it was pointed out that progress of a software development project is particularly difficult to measure.
In order to control progress we use a phased development in which a number of clearly identifiable milestones are established between the start and finish of the project. We use a similar mechanism when constructing a house: foundations are laid, the first floor is reached, the house is weatherproofed, and so on. Often, the payment of installments is coupled to reaching those milestones.
In general, the milestones identified in a software development project correspond to the points in time at which certain documents become available:
	after requirements engineering, there is a requirements specification;
	after the design phase there is a (technical) specification of the system;
	after implementation there is a set of programs;
	after testing has been completed there is a test report.
Traditional models for the phased development of software are, to a large extent, document-driven. The pile of paper that is produced in the course of the project guides the development process. The development process is seen as a series of transformations. It starts with a clear requirements document, and ends with running code. In the next section we discuss the waterfall model, a well-known variation of the process model introduced in chapter 1. In this variation, a check is performed after each transformation, to determine whether we are still on the right track.
These document-driven methods are also known as planning-driven or heavyweight methods. Planning-driven, because of the emphasis on an upfront plan for the whole process. Heavyweight, because of the emphasis placed on the process.
In many a software development project, change is a fact of life. It may even be the case that the client only has a vague idea of the requirements for the system he asks for. In recent years, a number of lightweight, agile methods have been proposed that purposedly deal with these rapidly changing circumstances. These methods advocate to not waste time on expensive planning and design activities early on, but to deliver something valuable to the customer as quickly as possible. Based on feedback from the user, next steps are then taken. Agile methods have evolved from approaches such as prototyping and Rapid Application Development that try to dispose of some or all of the drawbacks of the document-driven approach mentioned above. We will discuss a number of lightweight approaches to software development in section 3.2.
Evolutionary models take into account that much of what is called maintenance is really evolution. It would then seem natural to explicitly bear this anticipated evolution in mind from the very start. This is usually not the case. In both heavyweight and lightweight development approaches, the initial development of a software system is in general strictly separated from the subsequent maintenance phase. The major goal of a software development project then boils down to delivering a first version of the system to the user. This may result in excessive maintenance costs later on. In order to be able to properly assess costs and benefits, total life cycle cost rather than just development cost should be our primary focus. Going one step further, we may argue that management should concentrate on sets of similar products (so-called product families) rather than individual products, thereby granting an incentive both to the building of reusable parts and the reuse of (parts of) existing products when developing new ones.
From all the possible life cycle models we have to choose a particular one for any given project. By and large, heavyweight methods better fit (very) large projects, and situations where the requirements can be decided upon at an early stage. Lightweight methods fit situations of rapid change, and projects that do not involve more than, say, 50 people. Different project characteristics, and appropriate ways to control them effectively, are discussed in chapter 8.
The choice for a particular life cycle model also involves defining the individual steps and phases, their possible interaction, their deliverables, etc. By using an explicit process modeling language, which may be supported by tools, we may increase our understanding of the software process, we are provided with a handle to improve our control of software development, and we are given a baseline for process improvement. This type of process modeling is discussed in section 3.6. Because of the much larger emphasis on planning, this type of modeling fits in better with heavyweight methods.
	3.1	The Waterfall Model
The waterfall model is essentially a slight variation of the model introduced in chapter 1. The waterfall model is generally attributed to Royce (1970). However, a clearly phased approach to the development of software, including iteration and feedback, could already be found in publications from the early 1960s.
The waterfall model particularly expresses the interaction between subsequent phases. Testing software is not an activity which strictly follows the implementation phase. In each phase of the software development process, we have to compare the results obtained against those that are required. In all phases, quality has to be assessed and controlled.
In figure 3.1, V & V stands for Verification and Validation. Verification asks if the system meets its requirements (are we building the system right) and thus tries to assess the correctness of the transition to the next phase. Validation asks if the system meets the users requirements (are we building the right system).
 
	Figure 3.1	The waterfall model
3.1. THE WATERFALL MODEL
Both the model introduced in chapter 1 and the waterfall model place considerable emphasis on a careful analysis before the system is actually built. We want to prevent putting much energy into constructing a system which later turns out not to satisfy the users requirements.
We therefore try to identify and tie down the users requirements as early as possible. These requirements are documented in the requirements specification. On the basis of this document we may verify in subsequent phases whether or not these requirements are being met. Since it is difficult in practice, if not impossible, to completely specify the users requirements, a regular test should also be carried out with the prospective user. These tests are termed validation. Through these validation steps we may prevent the system under development diverging from the, possibly incompletely specified, user requirements.
McCracken and Jackson (1981) compare the waterfall model with a shop where the customer is obliged to give an order upon entering. There is no opportunity to look around, compare prices, change ones mind, or decide upon a different menu for todays dinner. Some things can be ordered by mail, but not all.
The waterfall model of software development, like Eschers waterfall, is unrealistic.
There is ample quantitative evidence that the classical document-driven model has many shortcomings. In many a software development project, the strict sequencing of phases advocated by the waterfall model is not actually obeyed. Figure 3.2 shows the average breakdown of activities across life cycle phases for a number of projects. In this figure, the label coding refers to a phase which encompasses both implementation and unit testing.
Activity			Phase	
	Design	Coding	Integration	Acceptance
			testing	testing
Integration testing	4.7	43.4	26.1	25.8
Coding	6.9	70.3	15.9	6.9
Design	49.2	34.1	10.3	6.4
Figure 3.2	Breakdown of activities across life cycle phases, after (Zelkowitz, 1988)
So, for example, only 50% of the design effort was found to occur during the actual design phase, while one-third of the design effort occurs during the coding period. Even worse, over 16% of the design effort takes place after the system is supposed to be finished.
The software design behavior of individual designers may be characterized as an opportunistic process (Guindon and Curtis, 1988). Designers move back and forth across levels of abstraction ranging from application domain issues to coding issues. Milestone dates seem to be somewhat arbitrary, and a significant part of the activities crosses phase boundaries.
	3.2	Agile Methods
The American Kennels Club definition of Agility is: The exciting sport of Agility has taken the world by storm. The Agility ring allows handler and dog to run full speed, while having to perform accurately and safely on A-Frames, Dog Walks, See-Saws and a wide variety of jumps and tunnels. Software engineers are not dogs, but the analogy is clear.
When using a heavyweight development method, it is difficult to change direction. Once the contract has been signed, the development teams job is to deliver the functionality as laid down in the contract. If reality changes, or the user gets a different insight, such is difficult to accomplish. It does not fit the architecture, it requires rework not accounted for, it lengthens the agreed upon schedule, and so on. It is a train that does not easily change direction.
This has been recognized over the years, and methods like prototyping and evolutionary development ensued. But these methods still somehow carry an engineering flavor with them. Essentially, they still assume the world is ordered. It may be difficult to pinpoint the true requirements right away, but they will accrue over time.
True agile methods view the world as fundamentally chaotic. They assume change is inevitable. Their focus is to deliver value to the customer as quickly as possible, and not bother about extensive plans and processes that wont be followed anyway. The essence of agile methods is laid down in the Manifesto for Agile Software Development, published in 2001 by a group of well-known pioneers in this area (Beck et al., 2001). The key values of the agile movement are:
Individuals and interactions over processes and tools.
Working software over comprehensive documentation.
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation.
Responding to change over following a plan.
Agile methods involve the users in every step taken. The development cycles are small and incremental. The series of development cycles is not extensively planned in advance, but the new situation is reviewed at the end of each cycle. This includes some, but not too much, planning for the next cycle.
At the end of each cycle, the system is up and running. That is, there is a working system, one that delivers value to its users. This strongly resembles evolutionary prototyping as discussed in section 3.2.1. But the difference in wording does reflect quite a different attitude. The term prototyping suggests something intermediate,
 
not yet final, temporary. Working code carries a more positive meaning. It denotes something of immediate value, even if not perfect yet.
Agile methods do not have an extensive architectural or design phase up front. After all, it does not make sense to spend much effort on design if you know this will quite likely be a waste of time. It is more effective to only do the design as far as needed for the immediate next step. Agile methods often have a separate activity to improve the design after each increment, known as refactoring.
Agile methods are people-oriented, rather than process-oriented. They emphasize the human element in software development. Team spirit is considered very important. Team relationships are close. Often, an agile team occupies one big room. The users are onsite as well. Agile methods have short communication cycles between developers and users, and between developers.
Finally, agile methods do not spend much energy on documentation. It will have to change anyhow, so why spend time on something that will soon be outdated. Rather, agile methods rely on the tacit knowledge of the people involved. If you have a question, ask one of your pals. Do not struggle with a large pile of paper, that quite likely will not provide the answer anyway.
Some people contend that agile methods should be pure, and exhibit all of the characteristics mentioned above. Others believe that a mixture of planning-driven and agile methods can be productive as well. We concur with the latter view. In the following subsections, we first discuss prototyping and incremental development, early methods that recognize that a planning-driven approach often does not fit the volatile situation at hand. Rapid Application Development and DSDM emphasize customer collaboration and the role of people in the process, and thus exhibit a number of key characteristics of agile methods. Finally, XP is a pure agile method.
3.2.1	Prototyping
It is often difficult to get and maintain a sufficiently accurate perception of the requirements of the prospective user. This is not surprising. It is in general not sufficient to take the existing situation as the one and only starting point for setting up software requirements. An important reason for embarking on a software development project is that one is not pleased with the present situation. What is wanted instead of the present situation is often not easy to determine. This holds even more in cases where we are concerned with a new application and the customer does not know the full possibilities of automation. In such cases, the development of one or more prototypes may help.
Analogies with the development of other products are appealing here. When developing a new car or chip, one will also build one or more prototypes. These prototypes are tested intensively before a real production line is set up. For the development of the push-button telephone, about 2000 prototypes were tested, with variations in form, size and positioning of the buttons, size and weight of the mouthpiece, etc.
It is possible to follow a similar road with software development. In this context a prototype can be described as a working model of (possibly parts of) a software system, which emphasizes certain aspects. There is, however, one big difference between the development of software and the development of physical products such as cars, chips or telephones: in developing physical products, the highest costs are generally incurred during production, when multiple copies of the product are being produced. In software development, making multiple copies of the product is almost free. If we were to follow the hardware approach to prototyping in software development, and produce a prototype with the same functionality as the final product, we would in fact develop an operational system, with correspondingly high costs. It does not then seem plausible to start all over again and develop the real system in a different way.
Using the definition given above and with the aim of developing a software prototype relatively cheaply, it is important that certain aspects are emphasized. This can be achieved through, for example:
	the use of very high-level languages, in which an executable version can be created quickly. This executable but probably rather inefficient version can be used to test the usability of the proposed system;
	the development of a system with less functionality, in particular as regards quality attributes such as speed and robustness.
One of the main difficulties for users is to express their requirements precisely. It is natural to try to clarify these through prototyping. This can be achieved by developing the user interface quickly. The prospective user may then work with a system that contains the interaction component but not, or to a much lesser extent, the software that actually processes the input. In this way, the user may get a good impression of what the future system will provide him with, before large investments are made to realize the system. Prototyping thus becomes a tool for requirements engineering. This is illustrated graphically in figure 3.3.
This figure shows that the various phases are gone through in two ways. The left-hand side of the figure is concerned with the prototyping stages. The iteration corresponds to the user-validation process, whereby new or changed requirements trigger the next cycle. The right-hand side concerns the actual production of the operational system. The difference between the two branches is that, by using different techniques and tools, the left-hand side can be traversed much more quickly and against much lower costs.
In figure 3.3, the prototyping phases and the later production phases have been clearly separated. This is appropriate, since we will use different techniques during the actual production phase, put much more emphasis on documentation, and so on. It is even feasible not to carry over the software product from the prototyping phases to the actual production phase, but to explicitly throw it away after the prototyping phases have come to an end. This is known as throwaway prototyping. It is not necessary
 
	Figure 3.3	Prototyping as a tool for requirements engineering
to do so, though. The prototype may evolve to the final product. The user starts by formulating the raw requirements, on the basis of which a first version of the system is produced. The user starts to work with this system, which leads to new, or changed, requirements. The next version is then developed. After a number of such iterations, the user is satisfied and the last version developed is the product to be delivered. This is known as evolutionary prototyping. In practice, evolutionary prototyping is used much more often than throwaway prototyping. Discarding a (partly) working system is a hurdle which is not easily taken. In agile methods, the phrase working code is often used instead of evolutionary prototype.
Both throwaway and evolutionary prototyping entail advantages and disadvantages. Figure 3.4 summarizes the pattern of pros and cons that emerges in case studies that describe experiences of applying a prototyping approach. Note that some properties can be influenced in both a positive and a negative way. Depending on circumstances, either or both may occur in an actual project. For example, the maintenance cost may go down because user needs are better satisfied. On the other hand, the maintenance cost may go up because development has been done in a quick and dirty way.
 
Advantages
 
-	The resulting system is easier to use
-	User needs are better accommodated
-	The resulting system has fewer features
-	Problems are detected earlier
-	The design is of higher quality
-	The resulting system is easier to maintain - The development incurs less effort
 
Disadvantages
 
-	The resulting system has more features
-	The performance of the resulting system is worse
-	The design is of lesser quality
-	The resulting system is harder to maintain
-	The prototyping approach requires more experienced team members
 
	Figure 3.4	Pros and cons of prototyping
Users as well as developers are generally more positive about systems developed using a prototyping approach. This positive attitude concerns both the development process and the resulting product. Users feel more involved in the development process and have fewer conflicts with the designers. The extensive user involvement results in systems which better satisfy user needs.
Since users need not express all their requirements up front in a prototyping approach, there is less tendency to ask for bells and whistles. As a consequence, the end result is a leaner system whose functionality closer matches the real user requirements. If users are shown a working system at an early stage and are given the opportunity to try it out, chances are that problems are detected at an early stage as well. This prevents a waste of manpower which would otherwise be needed to redo part of the work. If users are in a position to influence and modify the design, the system features will better reflect their requirements and the system will be easier to use.
The use of special-purpose prototyping tools or languages makes it easy to add features. Since the time interval between successive versions of the prototype is small, users may think that it is easy to realize new features and may specify additional requirements. Both these effects may result in systems having more, rather than fewer, features.
Prototyping involves iterative design steps and, because of the repeated attention to the design, its quality may increase. Since it is known a priori that the design will evolve during subsequent prototyping steps, greater attention will be given to quality factors such as flexibility and modularity and, as a result, design quality may improve as well. In throwaway prototyping, the quality of the final design is often higher because of the learning experience of the prototyping steps. Also, this final design step is hardly, if at all, patched up because of rework actions. Because of these aspects, the resulting systems are often found to be easier to maintain as well.
On the other hand, prototyping generally does not enforce strict design and development standards. If we are concerned with a short development time, certain necessary activities will receive less attention. The chances are that documentation is sacrificed for speed. Because of additions resulting from frequent rework steps, the design quality of an evolutionary prototype may deteriorate. For that reason too, the resulting systems are less maintainable. Especially in evolutionary prototypes, the robustness of the system will often be less than is customary with a more traditional approach. In agile methods, refactoring is applied to counteract this phenomenon. Finally, performance tends to be worse because attention is focused on functionality and performance measures are either not taken at all or at a point in time at which they have become too difficult to realize.
It is generally felt that prototyping projects require an experienced team. Prototyping involves making far-reaching design decisions, especially during early iterations. In each iteration, user requests have to be weighed, both mutually and against the ease and cost of their realization. Inexperienced team members are more likely to make poor choices, thereby seriously threatening the success of a prototyping effort.
From this discussion, we may gather the following recommendations for the use of prototyping techniques:
	prototyping is particularly useful in situations where the user requirements are unclear or ambiguous. Prototyping seems a good way to clarify those requirements;
	prototyping is also particularly useful for systems with a considerable emphasis on the user interface and which show a high degree of user interaction;
	users and designers must be well aware of the prototyping approach and its pitfalls. Users should realize that changing software is not all that easy. Users should also realize that a prototype is a prototype and not a production-quality system. Designers should be aware of the characteristics of prototyping projects and not become frustrated by frequent changes in user requirements;
	prototyping must also be planned and controlled. We must impose limits on the number of iterations. We must establish explicit procedures for documenting and testing prototypes. The positive aspects of the traditional approach, which make the process manageable and controllable, should also be applied in this case.
By taking appropriate counter-measures, the potential disadvantages of prototyping can be guarded against. Prototyping is then a viable alternative process model for many a software development project.
	3.2.2	Incremental Development
In the preceding section, we discussed a way of using prototypes for which the final system is the last of a series of prototypes. Under careful management control in order to ensure convergence, the next version is planned to accommodate new or changed user requirements. There is another way to work towards the final system in a number of iterations.
We proceed incrementally. The functionality of the system is produced and delivered to the customer in small increments. Starting from the existing situation we proceed towards the desired situation in a number of (small) steps. In each of these steps, the phased approach that we know from the waterfall model, is employed.
Developing software this way avoids the Big Bang effect, i.e. for a long time nothing happens and then, suddenly, there is a completely new situation. Instead of building software, the software grows. With this incremental approach, the user is closely involved in planning the next step. Redirecting the project becomes easier since we may incorporate changed circumstances more quickly.
Incremental development can also be used to fight the overfunctionality syndrome. Since users find it difficult to formulate their real needs, they tend to demand too much. Lacking the necessary knowledge of the malleability of software and its development process, they may be inclined to think that everything can be achieved. As a consequence, essential features appear next to bells and whistles in the list of requirements. Analysts are not able to distinguish one from the other, nor are they able to accurately estimate the effort required to implement individual features. Chances then are that much effort is spent on realizing features that are not really needed. As a result, many of todays systems offer a rich functionality, yet are at the same time ill-suited for the task at hand. For one thing, these systems are difficult to use simply because of the complexity incurred by their rich functionality.
With the incremental approach, attention is first focused on the essential features. Additional functionality is only included if and when it is needed. Systems thus developed tend to be leaner and yet provide sufficient support to their users. With the incremental approach, the most difficult parts are often tackled first, or the parts that have the highest risks with respect to a successful completion of the project.
Following this line of thought, Boehm (1988) suggests a spiral model of the software development process, in which each convolution of the spiral gives rise to the following activities:
	identify the sub-problem which has the highest associated risk;
	find a solution for that problem;
The various process models discussed before can be coupled with Boehms spiral model in a natural way (see figure 3.5):
	If obtaining the proper set of user requirements is seen as the area with highest risk, follow the spiral a few times around to solve this sub-problem (i.e., prototype).
	If, starting from a precise requirements specification, the main question is to obtain a robust and well-documented system, follow the spiral once, using the traditional process model with its phases and corresponding milestones as intermediate steps.
	If developing software incrementally, track the spiral a number of times, once for each increment.
	During maintenance, the reported errors or changing requirements are triggers to track the spiral.
Viewed this way, the spiral model subsumes the other process models discussed so far.
Incremental development is strongly advocated by Gilb (1988). It is doubtful whether the time increment advocated by Gilb, up to a maximum of a few weeks, is always reasonable. But the advantages of incremental development are considerable even with different time increments. Surprises that lurk within the traditional approach and that pose considerable difficulties on the management side of software development projects can be greatly diminished when software is developed and delivered incrementally.
3.2.3	Rapid Application Development and DSDM
Rapid Application Development (RAD) has a lot in common with other iterative development process models. It emphasizes user involvement, prototyping, reuse, the use of automated tools, and small development teams. In addition to that, it employs the notion of a time box, a fixed time frame within which activities are done. In most development models, a set of requirements is fixed and then the project attempts to fulfill these requirements within some estimated period of time. Within RAD, the time frame is decided upon first and then the project tries to realize the requested functionality within that time frame. If it turns out that not all of the functionality can be realized within the time frame, some of the functionality is sacrificed. The agreed deadline however is immovable.
The RAD life cycle consists of four phases:
	requirements planning,
	user design,
	construction,
 
Figure 3.5	The spiral model (Source: B.W. Boehm, A spiral model of software development and enhancement, IEEE Computer 21:5 (1988)	1988 IEEE.)
	cutover.
The requirements planning and user design phases have much in common and may be combined for smaller projects. Together, they typically take less than two months. The main techniques used in these phases are known as Joint Requirements Planning (JRP) and Joint Application Design (JAD). Both these techniques make heavy use of workshops in which the developers and the prospective users work together (hence the adjective Joint).
The goal of the JRP workshop is to get the requirements right the first time. For that reason, it is imperative that the key players, i.e. the end users of the system, be present. During the JRP workshop too, requirements are prioritized, since it is likely that not all of them will be implemented in the first version of the system. This requirement prioritization is known as triage. Triage usually means a process used on the battlefield and in emergency rooms to sort injured people into groups based on their need for or likely benefit from immediate medical treatment. In RAD, the triage process is used to make sure that the most important requirements are addressed first. The result of this process is often a prioritization denoted by the acronym MoSCoW: Must haves are requirements that are definitely needed.
Should haves are requirements that are important, but not absolutely needed for a usable system.
Could haves are requirements that are only implemented if time allows so.
Wont haves are requirements that will be left for the next iteration.
As an example, consider the development of a Library Information System. The Must have category would include the ability to borrow and return an item, and to enroll as a member. The Should have category might include facilities to make a reservation for an item. The ability to handle fines for items returned late might be considered a Could have. Finally, functions to profile users and notify them of newly arrived items might be classified as Wont haves.
It is customary to have two JAD workshops during the design phase. Again, the end users play an essential role in these workshops. The first JAD workshop yields an initial design of the system. The developers then construct a prototype, to be experimented with by the users. This prototype is evaluated during the second JAD workshop, improvements are decided upon, and the design is finalized.
The system is constructed by a so-called SWAT team, a highly skilled team of about four people. SWAT stands for Skilled With Advanced Tools (see also chapter 5). The SWAT team becomes involved after the first JAD workshop. The team typically does its job in less than two months. In order to be able to do so, heavy use is made of tools and existing components are reused whenever feasible. Within the time allotted (the time box), the SWAT team constructs a series of evolutionary prototypes. Developers and users work closely together during this process. Each prototype is reviewed by the users and the review sessions result in requests for enhanced or changed functionality. The agreed upon time frame is not exceeded. If necessary, some of the functionality is sacrificed instead.
For a SWAT team to operate successfully, and deliver a good result in a very short time span, it has to feel a definite ownership of the problem to be addressed. In such a situation, it is not very helpful if time estimates and deadlines are fixed by some manager. Instead, the SWAT team itself estimates the time, the SWAT team decides upon the number and length of the time boxes, and the SWAT team decides which functionality to implement in each iteration.
During the cutover phase, the final testing of the system takes place, users are trained, and the system is installed.
There are many variations on the RAD process model described above. For example, it is possible to have explicit time boxes for the construction of each of the intermediate prototypes as well. It is also possible to have JRP or JAD sessions after each prototyping cycle. The main ingredients, however, remain: prototyping, considerable user involvement, SWAT teams, and time boxes.
JRP and JAD have much in common with a design method known as Participatory Design (PD), or the Scandinavian school of software development. Both emphasize end-user involvement. They differ, however, in their goals. User involvement in JRP and JAD is primarily intended to speed up the process of producing the right system. User involvement in PD is motivated by a strong interest in the social context of the work environment.
A well-known framework that builds on RAD is DSDM. DSDM stands for Dynamic Systems Development Method. DSDM is based on the nine principles depicted in Figure 3.6. DSDM is a non-profit framework, maintained by the DSDM
Consortium . A high-level description of the framework is given in (Stapleton, 2003). The complete set of DSDM practices is only available to members of the DSDM Consortium. The DSDM process has five phases; see also figure 3.7:
In the feasibility study, the suitability of DSDM for the current project is assessed. This is different from a more traditional feasibility study, where the emphasis is whether a solution is feasible at all. So next to questions like Can we build this system at all?, the question Is DSDM appropriate for this project? has to be answered as well. Characteristics that make DSDM a feasible approach reflect the principles of the method: it must be possible to identify the users of the system, the system should not be too large, and not all requirements are known upfront.
The business study results in a high-level description of the business processes relevant for the system. These are determined using facilitated workshops (like JRP), and result in a high-level baseline. In this phase, the high-level architecture is determined as well.
The functional model iteration results in analysis models, prototypes, and implementation of the major functional components. Iteration is done in time boxes of typically two to six weeks. Each iteration consists of four activities: (1) identify what you will do, (2) agree on how you will do it, (3) do it, and (4) check that you have done it.
During the design and build iteration, the system is engineered to a sufficiently high standard. Here too, work is done in time boxes of typically two to six weeks, and the same four activities are performed. Though the emphasis of functional model iterations is on deciding what to build, and that of design and build iterations is on a properly engineered solution to that, the distinction between those two types of iteration is not always clearcut.
Principle	Description
Active	user	involvement	is imperative	Users support the team throughout the project, not just during requirements elicitation and acceptance testing. A short communication channel is kept between the development team and the users.
DSDM teams must be empowered to make decisions	The team must be able to make quick decisions. Momentum is lost if the team has to wait for
external approval of every small decision
The focus is on frequent delivery of products	Frequent delivery allows for frequent feedback from the user community, and frequent control on the decision-making process by managers
Fitness for business purpose is the essential criterion for acceptance of deliverables	The emphasis is on delivering the right product, not on gold-plating or conformance-to-specs
Iterative and incremental development is necessary to converge on an accurate business solution	Requirements cannot be completely determined upfront. Systems need to evolve, and rework is a fact of life
All changes during development are reversible	A wrong path may be taken, and backtracking is then required to get to a safe point again
Requirements are baselined at a high level	The high-level requirements are determined during the business study phase, while detailed requirements are determined during later iterative phases
Testing is integrated throughout the lifecycle	Testing is not postponed until after coding has finished. It is done incrementally, after each component is written
A collaborative and cooperative approach between all stakeholders is essential	Responsibilities are shared, and developers need support from end-users to decide what to develop
	Figure 3.6	The principles of DSDM
In the Implementation phase, the system is carried over to the customer environment. This phase also includes user training.
3.2.4	Extreme Programming
Extreme Programming, XP for short, is a pure agile method. XP is based on a number of best practices that have been known for long. XP takes these practices to extreme
 
	Figure 3.7	The DSDM process
levels.
For instance, we know that code reading by your pals, such as is done in walkthroughs and code inspections (see also chapter 13) is a very effective test method. In XP, one does this all the time: two programmers work together behind one computer screen. One of them does the coding, the other one looks over her shoulder, gives advice, notices small slips, asks questions, and the like. They act as pilot and co-pilot. At any point in time, the roles may shift. This practice is called pair programming.
The full set of XP practices is given in figure 3.8. Typically, an XP team is not too big, and occupies one room. Planning meetings are very short, and involve the immediate functionality to be delivered to the customer. Planning involves both the customer and the technical people. The customer has to set priorities, determine dates of releases, and the like. The customer describes desirable features of the system in stories, on index cards. The technical people estimate how long it takes to implement a story, decide on the order in which stories within one release will be implemented, etc.
In XP, the design is kept as simple as possible. Since the future is, after all, unclear, there is no use to design a grand scheme that will not be followed anyhow. So the
XP practice	Description
The Planning Game	The scope of the next release is quickly determined. When necessary, the plan is updated
Small releases	First realize a simple system, then release next versions in short cycles
Metaphor	Use of a simple metaphor for the whole system
Simple design	Make sure the design is as simple as possible at any point in time. Remove complexity as soon as possible
Testing	Programmers continuously write unit tests, customers write acceptance tests
Refactoring	Restructure the system without changing its behaviour, to improve quality
Pair programming	All	code	is	written	by	two	programmers at	one machine
Collective ownership	Anyone can change any code, anywhere, at any time
Continuous integration	The system is integrated and built many times a day
40-hour week	As a rule, work 40 hours a week. Working overtime should be the exception
On-site customer	Have a real user on the team, full-time
Coding standards	Establish coding standards to ease communication
	Figure 3.8	XP Practices
design only covers the current version of the system. After a task is accomplished, the system is checked to see how it can be improved (remove duplicate code, make it simpler, make it more flexible). This is called refactoring. This refactoring need not be restricted to ones own code. Everyone is responsible for the whole system. To make this work, one needs to set coding standards.
When a team works on implementing a story, it writes tests to check the implementation of that story at the same time. Before the new code is checked in, all these tests have to run successfully. After the code has been checked in, the full test suite is run, and again all tests have to run successfully. If not, the new code is removed again to fix it. This way, there always is a running system. XP is based on five principles that drive its practices:
Rapid feedback Feedback is obtained quickly, within hours, or at most a few days. By testing each small piece added, developers immediately learn what works and what doesnt. By frequently delivering a running system to the customer, the customer learns what value the system offers, and what next features are needed.
Assume simplicity Todays job is done today, and tomorrows job is left for tomorrow. Dont build in extra complexity so that a certain class becomes more flexible and may be reused if a certain feature is to be added. If and when this feature is needed, it will be added, and code will be refactored to make it simpler.
Incremental change In XP, things change in small increments. The plan changes a little at a time, the design changes a little, the team changes a little, etc.
Embracing change By not planning, designing, coding more than is needed right now, the most options for the future are kept. Only the most pressing problem is tackled today. The rest is left for tomorrow.
Quality work Quality is a must. The team should find pride in delivering excellent quality.
As noted before in this chapter, agile methods are suited for certain projects, but not for all. This is certainly also true for XP, the most extreme agile approach. If requirements are unsure, the system is not too big, and the customer can be on site, XP deserves serious consideration. Early sources recommend using all of XPs practices, since they reinforce each other. But nowadays there also exist many approaches that adopt one or a few of XPs practices.
	3.3	The Rational Unified Process (RUP)
The Rational Unified Process is an iterative development process, geared towards the development of object-oriented systems. It comes with a lot of tool support, inter/intranet sources and templates for different kinds of documents. It complements UML, the Unified Modeling Language. RUP might be viewed as somewhat intermediate between document-driven and agile methods. It has a well-defined process, includes reasonably extensive upfront requirements engineering activities, yet emphasizes stakeholder involvement through its use-case driven nature. Its two-dimensional process structure is depicted in figure 3.9.
RUP distinguishes four phases: inception, elaboration, construction and transition. Within each phase, several iterations may occur. In a second dimension, RUP distinguishes nine so-called workflows, such as a requirements workflow and a test workflow. These workflows group logical activities, and might extend over all phases, with varying levels of attention. For instance, the requirements workflow is likely to get a lot of attention during the early phases, while the deployment workflow is most relevant in the transition phase. This is graphically illustrated by the undulating shapes
 
3.3. THE RATIONAL UNIFIED PROCESS (RUP)
 
Figure 3.9 Process structure of RUP (Source: P. Kruchten, The Rational Unified Process, An Introduction, 2003, Addison-Wesley)
next to each workflow in figure 3.9. This structure allows us to differentiate between successive iterations, and stress that different iterations have a different emphasis. It recognizes that requirements engineering, design, etc are ongoing activities rather than phases with a strict start and end time.
The inception phase focuses on getting the objectives clear: what is the scope of this project, what are its boundaries, what are the acceptance criteria that will be used when the system is delivered to its customers? During this phase too, the overall cost, schedule and risks are estimated. Critical use cases are developed, as well as a candidate architecture. At the end of this phase, the business case for the system must be clear. This might be input to a go/no-go decision.
The elaboration phase is mainly targeted at analyzing the problem domain, and obtaining a sound architecture. At the end of this phase, most use cases will be identified, and all major risks must be resolved.
The construction phase is a manufacturing, building process. The emphasis is on developing deployable products. Complete components are developed and thoroughly tested. User manuals are written. At the end of this phase, the first operational version of the system, the beta release, is ready.
In the transition phase, the system is released to the user community and betatested. During this phase, databases may have to be converted, users are trained and, in case of a replacement system, the legacy system being replaced is phased out.
RUP is based on a series of best practices that have evolved over the years. These best practices are listed in Table 3.10. Many of these best practices of course are also present in other development models. A strong point of RUP is that it provides a balanced integration of them. Given its background, it is no surprise that RUP is geared towards the development of object-oriented systems. But RUP is suited for projects with widely different characteristics. The tuning of RUP to the situation at hand though is left to the user of the method.
	3.4	Intermezzo: Maintenance or Evolution
Old payroll programs never die;
they just get fat around the middle
Robert Granholm (Datamation, 1971)
In chapter 1, it was pointed out that a considerable maintenance effort is inevitable. Each maintenance task, whether it concerns repairing an error or adapting a system to new user requirements, in principle entails all aspects of the initial development cycle. During maintenance, we also have to analyze the problem and conceive a design which is subsequently implemented and tested.
The first big difference is that these changes are being made to an existing product. However, during initial development we often do not start from scratch either. If an existing organization decides to automate its order administration, the system may have to interface with already existing systems for, say, stock administration and bookkeeping. Thus, maintenance activities differ in degrees from initial development, rather than fundamentally. This relative difference is even more apparent when the system is prototyped or developed incrementally.
The second main difference, time pressure, has a much larger impact. Time pressure is most strongly felt when repairing errors, for then it is quite possible that certain parts of the organization have to shut down because the software is not operational. In such cases, we have to work against time to identify and repair the errors. Often one patches the code and skips a thorough analysis and design step. The structure of the system tends to suffer from such patches. The systems entropy increases, which hampers later maintenance activities. Worse still, the systems documentation may not be updated. Software and the corresponding documentation then grow apart, which will again hamper future maintenance activities. A more elaborate discussion of maintenance issues is given in chapter 14.
Lehman and his co-workers have extensively studied the dynamics of software systems that need to be maintained and grow in size. Based on those quantitative studies, they formulated the following laws of software evolution (explained below):
1.	Law of continuing change A system that is being used undergoes continuous change, until it is judged more cost-effective to restructure the system or replace it by a completely new version.
3.4. INTERMEZZO: MAINTENANCE OR EVOLUTION
Best practice	Description
Iterative development	Systems are developed in an iterative way. This is not an uncontrolled process. Iterations are planned, and progress is measured carefully.
Requirements management	RUP has a systematic approach to eliciting, capturing and managing requirements, including possible changes to these requirements.
Architecture and Use of components	The early phases of RUP result in an architecture. This architecture is used in the remainder of the project. It is described in different views. RUP supports the development of component-based systems, in which each component is a nontrivial piece of software with well-defined boundaries.
Modeling and UML	Much of RUP is about developing models, such as a use-case model, a test model, etc. These models are described in UML.
Quality of process and product	Quality is not an add-on, but the responsibility of everyone involved. The testing workflow is aimed at veryfying that the expected level of quality is met.
Configuration	and	change management	Iterative development projects deliver a vast amount of products, many of which are frequently modified. This asks for sound procedures to do so, and appropriate tool support.
Use-case-driven development	Use cases describe the behaviour of the system. They play a major role in various workflows, especially the requirements, design, test and management workflow.
Process configuration	No size fits all. Though RUP can be used as-is, it can also be modified and tailored to better fit specific circumstances.
Tool support	To be effective, a software development needs tool support. RUP is supported by a wide variety of tools, especially in the area of visual modeling and configuration management.
	Figure 3.10	Best practices of RUP
2.	Law of increasing complexity A program that is changed becomes less and less structured (the entropy increases) and thus becomes more complex. One has to invest extra effort in order to avoid increasing complexity.
3.	Law of self regulation Software evolution processes are self-regulating and promote a smooth growth of the software.
4.	Law of conservation of organisational stability (invariant work rate) The global progress in software development projects is statistically invariant.
5.	Law of conservation of familiarity A system develops a constant growth increment to sustain the organizations familiarity with the system. When this increment is exceeded, problems concerning quality and usage will result.
6.	Law of continuing growth The functionality of a system needs to continuously increase in order to maintain user satisfaction.
7.	Law of declining quality The quality of a system declines, unless it is actively maintained and adapted to its changing environment.
8.	Law of system feedback Software evolution must be seen as a feedback system in order to achieve improvements.
In an early publication, Lehman (1974) compares the growth of software systems with that of cities and bureaucracies. He makes a distinction between progressive and anti-regressive activities in software development. Lehman considers this model also applicable to socio-economic systems. In a city, for instance, progressive activities contribute to an increase in the living standard or quality of life. Anti-regressive activities, such as garbage collection, serve to maintain the status quo. If insufficient attention is paid to those anti-regressive activities, decline will set in. Anti-regressive activities often are not interesting, politically speaking. It is an investment in the future, which had better be left to others. (The same phenomenon can be observed in the growth of the chemical industry and the resulting pollution problems.)
According to Lehman, the same kinds of activity occur within a software development project. Generating new code and changing existing code are progressive activities. These are interesting, challenging and rewarding activities. They provide the user with new or better functionality. Writing documentation, improving the structure of the code, and maintaining good communication between the people involved are anti-regressive activities. Neglecting these activities may not be harmful in the short term, but it certainly will be in the long term. For each system, we have to look for a proper balance between both kinds of activity.
The working of the third law (the law of self regulation) can be illustrated by means of figure 3.11 which depicts the growth pattern of system attributes over time. System attributes include the length (measured in lines of code), the number of modules, the number of user-callable functions, etc. The time axis may denote the release number, the number of months the system is operational, or the like. (The
3.4. INTERMEZZO: MAINTENANCE OR EVOLUTION
actual data studied by Lehman concern the relation between the number of modules and the release number of the OS360 operating system.)
The relation depicted in figure 3.11 is almost linear. The ripples in the figure are very regular as well. Periods of more than linear growth alternate with periods of less than linear growth. Lehman explains the more than linear growth by pointing at the pressure from users to get more functionality as fast as possible. The developers or maintainers tend to bend under this pressure. As a consequence, one uses tricks and shortcuts in the code, documentation lags behind, errors are introduced and the system is insufficiently tested. After a while, more attention is paid to anti-regressive activities: code needs to be refactored and documentation brought up to date before further growth is possible. The two kinds of activity stabilize over time.
 
	Figure 3.11	Growth of system attributes over time
The fourth law (the law of conservation of organisational stability) seems rather surprising at first sight. Lehman and Belady found that such things as manpower and other resources do not correlate at all to the speed with which systems grow or change. Apparently, large systems are in some sort of saturated state. More people can be kept at work but, in the long run, they have no perceived impact on the evolution of the system.
More than average growth in some version of a system was, in Lehman and Beladys observations, almost always followed by a less than average growth in the next version (as expressed in the fifth law -- the law of conservation of familiarity).
In one of the systems they investigated, a substantially higher growth inevitably led to problems: lower reliability, higher costs, etc. Apparently, an organization has to sustain sufficient familiarity with its software. Here too, a self-regulating feedback was observed.
From the preceding discussion, it follows that we have to be alert during maintenance. We have to preserve quality at each and every step. We may try to preclude the dangers sketched above by explicitly engaging ourselves in the various development phases during maintenance. The cyclic process followed during initial development then occurs during maintenance too. As with prototyping, the time needed to go through the complete cycle will in general be much shorter than during initial development. This way of looking at maintenance closely resembles the evolutionary view of software development. Realizing the first version of a software system is only the first step. True enough, this first step is more costly than most steps that follow, but it is not fundamentally different. In chapter 1 we already noticed that such an approach may also have positive effects on the social and organizational environment in which software development takes place.
The waterfall model gives us a static view of the system to be developed. Reality is different. In developing software, and in particular during maintenance, we are concerned with an evolving system. As remarked before: software is not built, it grows.
	3.5	Software Product Lines
When similar products are developed, we may hope to reuse elements from earlier products during the development of new products. Such is not the habit in software development though. In many an organization there is no incentive to reuse elements (code, design, or any other artefact) from another system since that is not what we are being paid for. Similarly, there is no incentive to produce reusable elements, since the present project is all that counts.
As an alternative, we may conceive of the notion of a software product line, a set of software systems that share elements. In a software product line, reuse is planned, not accidental. To keep the scope within reasonable boundaries, this planned reuse is tied to a given domain.
Suppose we have developed a successful library system for our computer science faculty library. Chances are that we will be asked to develop a similar system for, say, the faculty of earth sciences. We reuse as much as possible from our first system. Likely also, some finetuning is needed to satisfy the other faculty. Possibly, they have maps that may be borrowed and require some specific way of dealing with. Next, yet another faculty may come by and ask for a third system. And so on. Rather than act reactively, and reuse suitable elements from previous efforts, we may also act proactively, and plan for the development of a series of systems in the domain of library automation right from the beginning.
3.6. PROCESS MODELING
This way of doing involves two processes: domain engineering and application engineering.
In domain engineering, we analyse the domain we are going to develop for. This process has a life cycle of its own. It results in a set of reusable components that form the basis for the products to be developed. Usually also, a reference architecture for all products to be developed is produced as well. An important step in this process is to decide on the scope of the product line. Are we going to develop a product line for just university libraries, or for libraries in general? The former is simpler, but has a more limited market. The latter potentially has a bigger market, but is likely to result in a more complex overall architecture and more complex products. Scoping for product lines is a difficult issue. It is influenced by the strategy of the organization and requires insight into the likely evolution of the domain. Finally, the domain engineering process yields a production plan, a guide of how to develop products within the product family.
Application engineering concerns the development of individual products. It usually follows a waterfall-like scheme. Its inputs are the outputs of the domain engineering process: the reference architecture, the production plan, and the set of reusable assets.
Product line organizations often separate domain engineering activities from application engineering activities. Effectively, these activities then constitute separate projects. The development of an individual product may result in new or adapted components that lead to adaptations at the product family level, which in turn affects the development of subsequent products. Consequently, there are feedback loops from the application engineering process to the domain engineering process and vice versa.
Software product lines are particularly suitable in domains where there is a lot of variation in quite similar products, such as mobile phones, television sets, cameras. Companies operating in these domains have pioneered the product line field.
A more elaborate discussion of software reuse and software product lines is given in chapter ??. Software architectures are discussed in chapter 11.
3.6	Process Modeling
Without a repeatable process, the only repeatable results you are likely to produce are errors.
(Macala et al., 1996)
In the 1980s, Osterweil launched the idea of describing software development processes as programs. These process programs are written in a process programming language. Like other programming languages, process programming languages have a rigorously defined syntax and semantics. As a simple example, consider the Pascal-like description of a review process in figure 3.12.  It describes the consecutive steps of a review process. The process has two inputs: the document to be reviewed and some number which serves as a threshold. The routine returns a boolean indicating whether or not another review is to be scheduled.
function review (document, threshold): boolean; begin prepare-review; hold-review(document, no-of-problems); make-report; return no-of-problems threshold
end review;
	Figure 3.12	A process program for the review process
In figure 3.12, the review process is described in terms of the successive activities to be performed: first, the review is prepared, then the meeting is held, and finally a report is made. We may also describe the process in terms of the states it can be in. After the preparation activities (distribution of the document amongst participants, scheduling of a meeting, and the like), the document is ready to be reviewed. After the meeting has been held, a report can be written. And after the report has been written, further steps can be taken. Figure 3.13 describes the review process in terms of states and transitions between states. The box labeled review process describes the review process proper. The inputs and outputs of the process are indicated by arrows leading into and out of the box. This figure uses the UML notation for state diagrams (a variant of the state transition diagram); see section 10.3.2.
Petri nets provide yet another formalism to describe process models. Figure 3.14 gives a Petri net view of the review process. A Petri net is a directed graph with two types of node: places and transitions. A place is depicted as a circle. It denotes a (partial) state of the system. A place is either marked or unmarked. In figure 3.14, the place code ready is marked, but review scheduled is not. A transition is depicted by a straight line. A transition receives input from one or more places, and delivers output to one or more places. These inputs and outputs are denoted by arrows leading to and from a transition. A transition denotes an activity which can be performed (in Petri net terminology, fired) if all of its input places are marked. Places can thus be thought of as preconditions for activities. In figure 3.14, the review meeting cannot be held, since it has not been scheduled yet. Once it has been scheduled, the corresponding place is marked and the transition can be fired. The markings are then removed from all of the input places and all of the output places are marked instead.
3.6. PROCESS MODELING
 
	Figure 3.13	State transition diagram of the review process
 
	Figure 3.14	Petri net view of the review process
Petri nets are an attractive modeling technique for processes, since they allow a certain amount of nondeterminism and parallellism. For example, the process in figure 3.14 does not specify the order in which coding and scheduling activities are to be performed. They may go on in parallel; synchronization takes place when both are finished.
A precise description of the software process, be it in a programming-language notation, a graphical notation, or otherwise, serves three main purposes:
It facilitates understanding and	communication. In a software development project, people have to work together. They thus need to have a shared view of the processes to be carried out and the roles they are to play in those processes. Either model of the review process given above can be used for this purpose.
It supports process management and improvement. A precise description of activities to be performed can be used by project management to assign tasks and to keep track of who is doing what. If the software development process is to be improved, you first have to know what the current process is, i.e. it has to be modeled.
It may serve as a basis for automated support. This automated support may guide or enforce the order in which tasks are being carried out. For instance, a reviewer may automatically be sent a message indicating that a certain piece of code is ready for review as soon as its author releases that code. The automated support may also be used to monitor and track progress, collect process information and metrics, and so on.
The description of the review process in figure 3.12 is very deterministic. It can be completely automated and executed without human intervention. In general, the work that is being modeled will be carried out by both humans and machines. The neutral term enactment is used to denote the execution of the process by either humans or machines. Support for process enactment is often combined with support for configuration management (see section 4.1).
Though the precise modeling of the software process has definite advantages, the resulting process formality, or even rigidity, holds certain dangers and limitations as well:
Many aspects of the software development process are heuristic or creative in nature and do not lend themselves to an algorithmic description. For example, the actual debugging or design processes will be quite difficult to capture in a process model.
A process model is a model and, thus, a simplification of reality. For example, the above models of the review process do not specify what to do if the minutes of the meeting are not delivered or the review is not held because the author of the code is on sick-leave, and so on.
Process models often focus on the transformation of artifacts, such as code, a requirements specification, or a test plan. The progression of stages through which the artifact evolves then gets confused with the organization of the processes through which people actually develop those artifacts. This argument was used earlier when we criticized the waterfall model. It is supported by the studies of Zelkowitz and Guindon reported in section 3.1. Parnas and Clements (1986) use similar arguments when they criticize the view that the software design process is a rational one.
3.7. SUMMARY
Processes that do not directly transform artifacts tend to be ignored (for example, learning the application domain, handling requirements that fluctuate or conflict, and dealing with breakdowns in communication or coordination (Curtis et al., 1988).
Processes are treated as discrete rather than continuous in time (i.e. each project invokes a separate process). This view inhibits the transfer of knowledge between projects, as was discussed in the previous section.
Process modeling has received a lot of attention in the research literature. It is indicative of the need for more formal approaches to the description of the software process. The latest trend in process modeling research is aimed at providing developers with computer guidance and assistance, rather than trying to fully automate the process. Such precise descriptions provide a basis for a range of support functions, ranging from the enactment of design steps to agenda management. This trend to support people rather than take over fits in well with agile developments too.
3.7	Summary
In this chapter we have addressed the software life cycle again. There are quite a few arguments against the strict sequential ordering of phases as discussed in chapter 1. The traditional approach is, to a large extent, document-driven. On the way from start to finish a number of milestones are identified. Reaching those milestones is determined by the availability of certain documents. These documents then play a key role in controlling the development process. It is a heavyweight process, and planning-driven.
Daily practice hardly fits this model. Change is inevitable, and we had better adopt a development method that accommodates change. In recent years, a number of agile, lightweight methods have been proposed that consciously deal with change. These have evolved from methods such as prototyping, incremental development, and Rapid Application Development. A very influential agile method is eXtreme Programming, or XP.
If a series of similar products is developed within a domain, it pays off to plan reuse upfront, rather than leave it to individual projects to deliver reusable components. This had led to the notion of software product lines, discussed in section 3.5. In software product line engineering, the domain engineering part takes care of developing reusable assets, while the application engineering part produces individual products using those assets.
Finally, we introduced the notion of process modeling, which is aimed at describing the software development process in a precise and unambiguous way. Such descriptions are not intended to fully replace human activities, but rather to support them.
	3.8	Further Reading
The waterfall model is generally attributed to Royce (1970) and became well known through Boehm (1976). However, a clearly phased approach to the development of software, including iteration and feedback, can already be found in earlier publications: (Benington, 1983) and (Hosier, 1961).
Advantages and disadvantages of prototyping, based on an analysis of 22 published case studies and 17 first-hand accounts, are given in (Gordon and Bieman, 1994). (Verner and Cerpa, 1997) address the different views held by analysts and managers of the pros and cons of prototyping.
For a very elaborate discussion of RAD, see (Martin, 1991). DSDM is discussed in (Stapleton, 2003). Participatory Design is described in (Floyd et al., 1989). (CACM, 1993a) is a special issue on Participatory Design. It contains articles describing experiences with Participatory Design, as well as a comparison of RAD and Participatory Design. (Kruchten, 2003) provides a good introduction to RUP.
There are many books about agile methods. The standard book on XP is by its inventor, Kent Beck (2000). A good companion volume is (Jeffries et al., 2001). Other agile methods include Scrum (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002) and the Crystal family of methodologies (Cockburn, 2002). For a comparison of a number of agile methods, see (Abrahamsson et al., 2002). Boehm and Turner (2003) compare planning-driven and agile methods, and give advice on when to use which kind of method.
Lehman and Belady (1985) give an overview of their early work on the laws of software evolution. Lehman et al. (1997) and Cook et al. (2006) provide an updated perspective. The formulation given in this chapter is based on (Lehman et al., 1997).
A factory-like view of software development was suggested at the very first conference on Software Engineering (McIlroy, 1968). The term software factory is also often associated with Japanese efforts to improve software development productivity (Cusumano, 1989). The notion of software product lines emerged in the 80s as a way to increase economy of scale. Clements and Northrop (2001) and Pohl et al. (2005) provide an in-depth discussion of software product line engineering.
(Osterweil, 1987) launched the idea of describing software development processes as programs. Critical appraisals of this view are given in (Lehman, 1987), (Curtis et al., 1987) and (Curtis, 1989). The current trends in software process modeling are described in (Fuggetta and Wolf, 1996).
Exercises
1.	Describe the waterfall model of software development.
2.	Describe the Rapid Application Development (RAD) approach to software development.
3.8. FURTHER READING
3.	Discuss the main differences between prototyping and incremental development.
4.	Discuss the main differences between incremental development and RUP.
5.	Discuss the law of continuing change.
6.	How does the spiral model subsume prototyping, incremental development, and the waterfall model?
7.	Explain the XP practices pair programming and refactoring.
8.	What is a software product line?
9.	What is the main purpose of having an explicit description of the software development process in a process model?
10.	What is process enactment?
11.	Discuss the key values of the agile movement.
12.	Suppose you are involved in a large project concerning the development of a patient planning system for a hospital. You may opt for one of two strategies. The first strategy is to start with a thorough analysis of user requirements, after which the system is built according to these requirements. The second strategy starts with a less complete requirements analysis phase, after which a pilot version is developed. This pilot version is installed in a few small departments. Further development of the system is guided by the experience gained in working with the pilot version. Discuss the pros and cons of both strategies. Which strategy do you favor?
13.	Consider the patient planning system project mentioned in the previous exercise. Under what conditions would you opt for an agile approach for this project?
14.	Discuss the relative merits of throwaway prototyping as a means to elicit the true user requirements and prototyping as an evolutionary development method.
15.	In what ways may the notion of a software product line impact the structure of the software development process?
16.	Software maintenance increases system entropy. Discuss possible ways to counteract this effect.
17.	One of the reasons for using planning-driven approaches in software development projects is that the plan provides some structure to measure

project progress. Do you think this measure is adequate? Can you think of better ways to measure progress?
18.	Discuss the differences between RAD and Participatory Design (see also (Carmel et al., 1993)).
19.	Describe the requirements engineering process depicted in figure 9.1 in a notation like a programming language. Be as precise as possible. Discuss the advantages and limitations of the resulting process description.
20.	Describe the requirements engineering process depicted in figure 9.1 in a state transition diagram. Discuss the advantages and limitations of the resulting process description.
 
4 Configuration Management
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To understand the main tasks and responsibilities of software configuration management
To be aware of the contents of a configuration management plan
To appreciate the interplay between the role of configuration management in software development and the capabilities of supporting tools
Careful procedures are needed to manage the vast number of elements (source code components, documentation, change requests, etc.) that are created and updated over the lifetime of a large software system. This is especially true in distributed development projects. It is called configuration management.
In the course of a software development project, quite a few documents are produced. These documents are also changed from time to time. Errors have to be corrected, change requests have to be taken care of, etc. Thus, at each point in time during a project, different versions of the same document may exist in parallel.
Often too, a software system itself is not monolithic. Software systems exist in different versions or configurations. Different versions come about when changes are implemented after the system has been delivered to the customer. From time to time, the customer is then confronted with a new release. Different versions of components of a system may also exist during development. For instance, if a change request has been approved, a programmer may be implementing that change by rewriting one or more components. Another programmer, however, may still be using the previous version of those same components.
Different configurations also come about if a set of components may be assembled into a system in more than one way. Take, for example, the system called ACK, the Amsterdam Compiler Kit (Tanenbaum et al., 1983). ACK consists of a set of programs to develop compilers for ALGOL-like languages. Important components of ACK are:
	front ends for languages such as Pascal, C, or Modula-2. A front end for language X will translate programs in that language into the universal intermediate code EM;
	different EM-optimizers;
	back ends, which translate EM-code to assembler-code for a variety of real machines.
A compiler is then obtained by selecting a front end for a specific language, a back end for a specific machine and, optionally, one or more optimizers. Each compiler is a configuration, a certain combination of elements from the ACK system. The ACK system is an example of a product line, from an era before that notion was used.
The key tasks of configuration management are discussed in section 4.1. A Configuration Management Plan lays down the procedures that describe how to approach configuration management. The contents of this document are discussed in section 4.2. Configuration management is often supported by tools. The discussion of those tools is largely postponed until chapter 15.
4.1	Tasks and Responsibilities
Configuration management is concerned with the management of all artifacts produced in the course of a software development project. Though configuration management also plays a role during the operational phase of a system, when different combinations of components can be assembled into one system and new releases of a system are generated, the discussion below centers around the role of configuration management during system development.
We will for the moment assume that, at any point in time, there is one official version of the complete set of documents related to the project. This is called the baseline. A baseline is a specification or product that has been formally reviewed and agreed upon, that thereafter serves as the basis for further development, and that can be changed only through formal change control procedures (IEEE610, 1990). Thus, the baseline is the shared project database, containing all approved items. The baseline may or may not be stored in a real database and supported by tools to assist in retrieving and updating its elements. The items contained in the baseline are the configuration items. A configuration item is an aggregation of hardware, software, or both, that is designated for configuration management and treated as a single entity in the configuration management process (IEEE610, 1990). Possible configuration items are:
	source code components,
	the requirements specification,
	the design documentation,
	the test plan,
	test cases,
	test results,
	the user manual.
At some point in time, the baseline will contain a requirements specification. As time goes on, elements will be added: design documents, source code components, test reports, etc. A major task of configuration management is to maintain the integrity of this set of artifacts.
This is especially important if changes are to be incorporated. Suppose that, during testing, a major flaw in some component is discovered. We then have to retrace our steps and correct not only that component but also the corresponding design documents, and possibly even the requirements specification. This may affect work being done by other people still using the old version. Worse still, someone else may wish to make changes to the very same component at the same time.
 
	Figure 4.1	Workflow of a change request
Configuration management takes care of controlling the release and change of these items throughout the software life cycle.
The way to go about this is to have one shared library or database that contains all approved items, the so-called baseline. Adding an item to this database, or changing an item, is subject to a formal approval scheme. For larger projects, this is the responsibility of a separate body, the Configuration (or Change) Control Board (CCB). The CCB ensures that any change to the baseline is properly authorized and executed. The CCB is staffed with people from the various parties involved in the project, such as development, testing, and quality assurance.
Any proposed change to the baseline is called a change request. A change request may concern an error found in some component, a discrepancy found between a design document and its implementation, an enhancement caused by changed user requirements, etc. A change request is handled as follows (see also figure 4.1):
The proposed change is submitted to the CCB. To be able to assess the proposed change, the CCB needs information as to how the change affects both the product and the development process. This includes information about the estimated amount of new or changed code, additional test requirements, the relationship to other changes, potential costs, complexity of the change, the severity of the defect (if it concerns one), resources needed, etc. Usually, a special change request form is provided to specify the information needed by the CCB.
The CCB assesses the change request. The change request may be approved, rejected, or deferred if further information is required. If the request is approved, it eventually results in a work package which has to be scheduled.
The CCB makes sure that all configuration items affected will eventually be updated accordingly. Configuration management provides a means to establish the status of all items and, thereby, of the whole project.
Thus, configuration management is not only about keeping track of all the different versions of elements of a system; it also encompasses workflow management tasks. The process depicted in the state transition diagram in figure 4.1, for example, describes what goes on in the life cycle of a change request. The process model thus defined exemplifies how the workflow of change requests can be managed.
In a similar vein, the state transition diagram in figure 4.2 shows the workflow of developer tasks during the development of a system component. It shows the possible states of a system component and the transitions in between. For example, after a component has been coded, it is unit tested. If bugs are found during unit testing, further coding is necessary. Otherwise, the component enters the review stage. If the review reveals problems, the coding stage is re-entered. Otherwise, the component is submitted to the CCB for formal approval. Finally, if unit testing does not reveal any errors, the review stage is skipped.
If components are kept under configuration control, configuration management can be used to manage the workflow of development tasks as well. Changes in the status of a component then trigger subsequent activities, as indicated in the development workflow model.
We have to take care that the workflow schemes do not unnecessarily curtail the day-to-day working of the people involved in the project. New items should not be added to the baseline until they have been thoroughly reviewed and tested. Items from the shared database may be used freely by the participants. If an item has to be changed, the person responsible for implementing the change gets a copy of that item and the item is temporarily locked, so that others can not simultaneously update the same item. The person implementing the change is free to tinker with the copy. After the change has been thoroughly tested, it is submitted back to the CCB. Once the CCB has approved it, the revised item is included in the database, the change itself is documented with the item, and the item is unlocked again. A sequence of documented changes thus provides a revision history of that item.
When an item is changed, the old version is kept as well. The old version still has to be used by others until they have adapted to the change. Also, we may wish to go back to the old version if another change is requested. We thus have different versions of one and the same item, and must be able to distinguish them. This can be done through some numbering scheme, where each new version gets identified by the next higher number. We then get, for a component X, versions X.0, X.1, X.2, and so on.
 
	Figure 4.2	State transition diagram of development activities
In a more sophisticated environment, we may even create different branches of revisions. Figure 4.3 gives an example of such a forked development. In the example, component X.2.1. is, say, the result of fixing a bug in component X.2. Component X.3 may concern an enhancement to X.2. It should be noted that merging those parallel development paths again can be difficult. Also, the numbering schemes soon tend to become incomprehensible.
Configuration management is generally supported by powerful tools. Dart (1990) classifies the functionalities of these software configuration management (SCM) tools in eight categories:
Components. SCM tools support storing, retrieving, and accessing components. Several versions of a component may be stored, baselines can be established, and branches of revisions may be created.
Structure. SCM tools support support the representation and use of the structure of a system made up of components and their interfaces. In terms of architectural viewpoints, this is the implementation viewpoint; see section 11.3.
 
	Figure 4.3	Parallel development paths
Construction. SCM tools support the construction of an executable version of the system. By default, the latest version of all configuration elements is used, but it is also possible to regenerate older versions of the system.
Auditing. SCM tools allow one to follow trails: which changes have been made to this component, who did those changes, and why. This way, a searchable archive of the system is maintained.
Accounting. The searchable archive allows one to gather statistics about the system and the development process. We may for instance search for components that are changed very often, and hypothesize about the quality of those components.
Controlling. SCM tools may be used for traceability purposes. If sufficient information is stored, we may trace defects to requirements, analyze the impact of changes, and the like.
Process. SCM tools may support users in selecting tasks and performing those tasks in the appropriate context. For instance, the tool may assist in assigning the handling of a change request to a certain developer, and automatically provide her with a workspace with the components that need to be changed.
Team. SCM tools may support collaboration, for example by generating a workspace for a group of collaborating developers, by noticing conflicts between developers, and the like.
Many SCM tools employ the version-oriented model of configurations. A physical change in a component then results in a new version, and different versions are thus characterized by their difference. Some tools use logical changes, rather than physical ones, as a basic unit of work in configuration management. This so-called change-oriented model gives a more intuitive way of working and may prevent a lot of user errors when configuring a system. Rather than identifying a configuration by some arcane sequence of numbers, it is now identified by some baseline plus a set of changes. The set of changes may be empty. We thus specify baseline X plus fix table size problem
rather than
	X.3.1, Y.2.7, Z.1.4, . . .	.
As noted, SCM tools tools also offer help in constructing an executable version of the system. One writes a program that identifies the various components of the required system and their mutual dependencies. The system in question is then generated by executing this program: the components are retrieved automatically from the database containing the source code components, and all components are translated and linked together into an executable system. If the system is smart enough, only those components that have been changed are translated anew.
Early SCM tools emphasized the product-oriented tasks of configuration management. They provide functionality to lock and unlock elements, provide for automatic numbering of revisions, and, by default, provide users with the latest version of an item. If an item is changed, they prompt the user and ask him to document the change. Present-day SCM tools increasingly provide the other functionalities as well, and have become a key ingredient of managing modern, distributed and global, software development. Tools for configuration and version management will be discussed more extensively in chapter 15.
On one hand, configuration management entails procedures on how to handle changes to and versions of documents. On the other hand, it consists of tool support to maintain the version history and ensure an up to date version of the system. In planning-driven development, both aspects are important. In agile projects, emphasis is on the tool support part. Agile projects favor continuous integration, whereby individual work of one developer is rapidly integrated with other parts of the system. And then tests are run to make sure everything still works as expected. Such a development cycle can take a few hours, and at most one day. At the end of the day, one again has a running system that passes all tests. This process is known as the daily build.
	4.2	Configuration Management Plan
The procedures for configuration management are laid down in a document, the Configuration Management Plan. For the contents of this plan, we will follow the corresponding IEEE Standard (IEEE828, 1990). This document describes methods to identify configuration items, to control change requests, and to document the implementation of those change requests. A sample table of contents of the Configuration Management Plan is given in figure 4.4. The main constituents of this plan are:
Management This section describes how the project is being organized. Particular attention is paid to responsibilities which directly affect configuration management:
 
4.3. SUMMARY
how are change requests being handled, how are development phases closed, how is the status of the system maintained, how are interfaces between components identified? Also, the relationship with other functional organizations, such as software development and quality assurance, is delineated.
Activities This section describes how a configuration will be identified and controlled and how its status will be accounted and reported. A configuration is identified by a baseline: a description of the constituents of that configuration. Such a configuration must be formally approved by the parties involved.
Clear and precise procedures are needed with respect to the processing of change requests if a software development project is to be controlled. A Configuration Control Board (CCB) usually has the responsibility to evaluate and approve or reject proposed changes. The authority, responsibility, and membership of the CCB have to be stated. Since software components are usually incorporated in a library, procedures for controlling this library have to be established as well.
In order to be able to control a software development project, data have to be collected and processed. Information that is normally required includes: the present status of components, versions and change requests, as well as reports of approved changes and their implementation.
Changes to configuration items may affect items outside the scope of the plan, such as hardware items. These external items have to be identified and their interfaces controlled. In a similar vein, interfaces to items developed outside the project have to be identified and controlled.
4.3	Summary
Configuration management is concerned with the management of all artifacts produced in the course of a software development project. It entails the following major activities:
Configuration items must be identified and defined. A configuration item is a collection of elements that is treated as one unit for the purpose of configuration management. Examples of possible configuration items are the requirements specification, a software component, a test report, and the user documentation.
The release and change of these items throughout the software life cycle must be controlled. This means that orderly procedures must be established as to whom is authorized to change or release configuration items.
The status of configuration items and change requests must be recorded and reported. For example, the status of a change request may be: proposed, approved, rejected, or incorporated.
For larger projects, a Configuration Control Board is usually established. The CCB is responsible for evaluating all change requests and maintaining the integrity of
 
1.	Introduction a. Purpose
b.	Scope
c.	Definitions and acronyms
d.	References
2.	SCM management
a.	Organization
b.	SCM responsibilities
c.	Applicable policies, directives and procedures
3.	SCM activities
a.	Configuration identification
b.	Configuration control
c.	Configuration status accounting
d.	Configuration audits and reviews
e.	Interface control
f.	Subcontractor/vendor control
4.	SCM schedules
5.	SCM resources
6.	SCM plan maintenance
 
Figure 4.4 Sample structure of a software configuration management (SCM) plan (Source: IEEE Standard for Software Configuration Management Plans, IEEE Std
828-1990. Reproduced by permission of IEEE.)
the complete set of documents that relate to a project. Its tasks and the further procedures for configuration management are laid down in a separate document, the Configuration Management Plan.
The history and development of configuration management is closely tied to the history and development of configuration-management tools. In the early days, these tools emphasized the logging of physical file changes. There was little support for process aspects. Present-day configuration-management systems address process aspects as well (workflow management) and many have adopted a change-oriented next to or instead of a version-oriented view of configurations. More and more, configuration-management tools function as document-management tools in that they support cooperation among a group of people, possibly distributed over multiple sites, working together on a collection of shared objects.
4.4. FURTHER READING
4.4	Further Reading
A readable introduction to the topic of configuration management is given in (Babich, 1986). A more recent source is (Jonassen Hass, 2002). Estublier et al. (2005) gives an excellent overview of the major developments in the field. Weber (1996) and Wiborg-Weber (1997) describe the change-oriented configuration management technology.
Further references on technical aspects of configuration management are given in a later chapter, when tools for configuration and version control are discussed.
Exercises
1.	What are the main tasks of configuration management?
2.	Describe the role of the Configuration Control Board.
3.	What is a configuration item?
4.	What is a baseline?
5.	Explain the difference between version-oriented and change-oriented configuration management.
6.	Discuss the main contents of a configuration management plan.
7.	Discuss differences and similarities between configuration management during development and maintenance.
8.	Discuss possible differences between configuration management in a traditional waterfall development model and the evolutionary development models (see also (Bersoff and Davis, 1991).
9.	Configuration management at the implementation level is often supported by tools. Can you think of ways in which such tools can also support the control of other artifacts (design documents, test reports, etc.)?
10.	Devise a configuration management scheme for a small project (say, less than one person-year) and a large project (say, more than ten person-years). Give a rationale for the possible differences between those schemes.
11.	To what extent could configuration-management tools support the gathering of quantitative project data? To what extent could such tools support project control?
 
5 People Management and Team Organization
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To be aware of the importance of people issues in software development
To know of different ways to organize work
To know of major types of management styles
To appreciate different ways to organize a software development team
Finding the right organizational framework and the right mix of skills for a development team is a difficult matter. Little well-founded theory is available for this. Yet, many stories of successful and less successful projects discern some of the intricacies of project team issues. This chapter sketches the major issues involved.
People are the organizations most important asset
(Humphrey, 1997a)
In most organizations that develop software, programmers, analysts and other professionals work together in a team. An adequate team structure depends on many factors, such as the number of people involved, their experience and involvement in the project, the kind of project, individual differences and style. These factors also influence the way projects are to be managed. In this chapter, we discuss various aspects of people management, as well as some of the more common team organizations for software development projects.
The work to be done within the framework of a project, be it a software development project, building a house, or the design of a new car, involves a number of tasks. A critical part of management responsibility is to coordinate the tasks of all participants.
This coordination can be carried out in a number of ways. There are both external and internal influences on the coordination mechanism. Internal influences originate from characteristics of the project. External influences originate from the projects organizational environment. If these influences ask for conflicting coordination mechanisms, conflicts between the project and the environment are lurking around the corner.
Consider as an example a highly innovative software development project, to be carried out within a government agency. The characteristics of the project may ask for a flexible, informal type of coordination mechanism, where the commitment of specialized individuals, rather than a strict adherence to formal procedures, is a critical success factor. On the other hand, the environment may be geared towards a bureaucracy with centralized control, which tries to impose formal procedures onto project management. These two mechanisms do not work harmoniously. As a consequence, management may get crushed between those opposing forces.
Section 5.1 further elaborates the various internal and external factors that affect the way projects are managed, and emphasizes the need to pay ample attention to the human element in project management.
Software development involves teamwork. The members of the team have to coordinate their work, communicate their decisions, etc. For a small project, the team will consist of up to a few individuals. As the size of the project increases, so will the team. Large teams are difficult to manage, though. Coordinating the work of a large team is difficult. Communication between team members tends to increase exponentially with the size of the team (see also chapter 7). Therefore, large teams are usually split into smaller teams in a way that confines most of the coordination and communication within the sub-team.
Section 5.2 discusses several ways to organize a software development team. Of these, the hierarchical and matrix organizations can be found in other types of business too, while the chief programmer, SWAT and agile team are rather specific to software development. Though open source projects have no means to impose team structure, they usually converge to an onion-like organization as discussed in section 5.2.6.
Because of outsourcing, networked companies and globalization, software development has become a distributed activity. Teams in, say, Amsterdam, Boston and Bangalore may have to cooperate on the development of the same system. How should we split up the tasks between these groups? How to ensure that communication between these groups is effective? Cultural differences play a role as well in multi-site development. For instance, people in Asia respect authority. In Northern America, it is more customary that team members argue with their manager. Managers as well as team members should be aware of those differences, and act accordingly. People issues that affect multi-site software development are discussed in chapter ??.
5.1	People Management
A team is made up of individuals, each of whom has personal goals. It is the task of project management to cast a team out of these individuals, whereby the individual goals are reconciled into one goal for the project as a whole.
Though the individual goals of people may differ, it is important to identify project goals at an early stage, and unambiguously communicate these to the project members. Project members ought to know what is expected of them. If there is any uncertainty in this respect, team members will determine their own goals: one programmer may decide that efficiency has highest priority, another may choose efficient use of memory, while yet a third will decide that writing a lot of code is what counts. Such widely diverging goals may lead to severe problems.
Once project goals are established and the project is under way, performance of project members with respect to the project goals is to be monitored and assessed. This can be difficult, since much of what is being done is invisible and progress is hard to measure.
Ideally, we would like to have an indication of the functionality delivered and define productivity as the amount of functionality delivered per unit of time. Productivity is mostly defined as the number of lines of code delivered per manmonth. Everyone will agree that this measure is not optimal, but nothing better has been found. One of the big dangers of using this measure is that people tend to produce as much code as possible. This has a very detrimental effect. The most important cost driver in software development projects is the amount of code to be delivered (see also the chapter on cost estimation). Writing less code is cheaper,
5.1. PEOPLE MANAGEMENT
therefore, and reuse of existing code is one way to save time and money. It should therefore be strongly advocated. Using the amount of code delivered per man-month as a productivity indicator offers no incentive for software reuse.
Another aspect of people assessment occurs in group processes like peer reviews, inspections and walkthroughs. These techniques are used during verification and validation activities, to discover errors or assess the quality of the code or documentation. In order to make these processes effective it is necessary to clearly separate the documents to be assessed from their authors. Weinberg Weinberg (1971) used the term egoless programming in this Context. An assessment of the product of someones work should not imply an assessment of that person.
One of the major problems in software development is the coordination of activities of team members. As development projects grow bigger and become more complex, coordination problems quickly accumulate. To counteract these problems, management formalizes communication, for example by having formal project meetings, strictly monitored inspections, and an official configuration control board. However, informal and interpersonal communication is known to be a primary way in which information flows into and through a development organization. It is unwise to rule out this type of communication altogether.  Informal, interpersonal communication is most easily accomplished if people are physically at close quarters. Even worse, people are inclined to trade the ease with which information can be obtained against its quality. They will easily accept their neighbors advice, even if they know that much better advice can be found on the next floor. To counteract this tendency, it is wise to bring together diverse stakeholders in controlled ways, for example by having domain experts in the design team, by having users involved in the testing of software, or through participatory design approaches. The collocation of all stakeholders is a main aspect of agile teams.
Successful software development teams exhibit a mix of qualities: technical competence, end-user empathy, and organization awareness. Technical competency of course is required to deliver a high-quality system in the first place. End-user empathy and organizational awareness have to do with recognition of the individuals and the organization that have to cope with the system. A blend of these orientations in a team helps to ensure sufficient attention is given to each of these aspects (Klein et al. (2002)).
Team management entails a great many aspects, not the least important of which concern the care for the human element. Successes among software development projects can often be traced to a strong focus on cultural and sociological concerns, such as efforts to create a blame-free culture, or the solicitation of commitment and partnership. This chapter touches upon only a few aspects thereof. (Brooks, 1995) and (DeMarco and Lister, 1999) give many insightful observations regarding the human element of software project management.
In the remainder of this section we will confine ourselves to two rather general taxonomies for coordination mechanisms and management styles.
5.1.1	Coordination Mechanisms
In his classic text Structures in Fives: Designing Effective Organizations, Mintzberg distinguishes between five typical organizational configurations. These configurations reflect typical, ideal environments. Each of these configurations is associated with a specific coordination mechanism: a preferred mechanism for coordinating the tasks to be carried out within that configuration type. Mintzbergs configurations and associated coordination mechanisms are as follows:
Simple structure In a simple structure there may be one or a few managers, and a core of people who do the work. The corresponding coordination mechanism is called direct supervision. This configuration is often found in new, relatively small organizations. There is little specialization, training and formalization. Coordination lies with separate people, who are responsible for the work of others.
Machine bureaucracy When the content of the work is completely specified, it becomes possible to execute and assess tasks on the basis of precise instructions. Mass-production and assembly lines are typical examples of this configuration type. There is little training and much specialization and formalization. The coordination is achieved through standardization of work processes.
Divisionalized form In this type of configuration, each division (or project) is granted considerable autonomy as to how the stated goals are to be reached. The operating details are left to the division itself. Coordination is achieved through standardization of work outputs. Control is executed by regularly measuring the performance of the division. This coordination mechanism is possible only when the end result is specified precisely.
Professional bureaucracy If it is not possible to specify either the end result or the work contents, coordination can be achieved through standardization of worker skills. In a professional bureaucracy, skilled professionals are given considerable freedom as to how they carry out their job. Hospitals are typical examples of this type of configuration.
Adhocracy In projects that are big or innovative in nature, work is divided amongst many specialists. We may not be able to tell exactly what each specialist should do, or how they should carry out the tasks allocated to them. The projects success depends on the ability of the group as a whole to reach a non-specified goal in a non-specified way. Coordination is achieved through mutual adjustment.
5.1. PEOPLE MANAGEMENT
The coordination mechanisms distinguished by Mintzberg correspond to typical organizational configurations, like a hospital, or an assembly line factory. In his view, different organizations call for different coordination mechanisms. Organizations are not all alike. Following this line of thought, factors external to a software development project are likely to exert an influence on the coordination mechanisms for that project.
Note that most real organizations do not fit one single configuration type. Different parts of one organization may well be organized differently. Also, Mintzbergs configurations represent abstract ideals. In reality, organizations may tend towards one of these configurations, but carry aspects of others as well.
5.1.2	Management Styles
The development of a software system, the building of a house, and the planning of and participation in a family holiday are comparable in that each concerns a coordinated effort carried out by a group of people. Though these projects are likely to be dealt with in widely different ways, the basic assumptions that underlie their organizational structures and management styles have a lot in common.
These basic assumptions can be highlighted by distinguishing between two dimensions in managing people:
	Relation directedness This concerns attention to an individual and his relationship to other individuals within the organization.
	Task directedness This concerns attention to the results to be achieved and the way in which these results must be achieved.
Both relation and task directedness may be high or low. This leads to four basic combinations, as depicted in figure 5.1. Obviously, these combinations correspond to extreme orientations. For each dimension, there is a whole spectrum of possibilities.
 
 	
	 	
 	 	 	
	 	 	
	

Figure 5.1	Four basic management styles, cf (Reddin, 1970)
The style that is most appropriate for a given situation depends on the type of work to be done:
Separation style This management style is usually most effective for routine work. Efficiency is the central theme. Management acts like a bureaucrat and applies rules and procedures. Work is coordinated hierarchically. Decisionmaking is top-down, formal, and based on authority. A major advantage of this style is that it results in a stable project organization. On the other hand, real innovations are difficult to accomplish. This style closely corresponds to Mintzbergs coordination through standardization of work processes.
Relation style This style is usually most effective in situations where people have to be motivated, coordinated and trained. The tasks to be performed are bound to individuals. The work is not of a routine character, but innovative, complex, and specialized. Decision-making is a group process; it involves negotiation and consensus building. An obvious weak spot of this style is that it may result in endless chaotic meetings. The managers ability to moderate efficient decision-making is a key success factor. This style best fits Mintzbergs mutual adjustment coordination mechanism.
Commitment style This is most effective if work is done under pressure. For this style to be effective, the manager has to know how to achieve goals without arousing resentment. Decision making is not done in meetings. Rather, decisions are implied by the shared vision of the team as to the goals of the project. A potential weak spot of this style is that, once this vision has been agreed upon, the team is not responsive to changes in its environment, but blindly stumbles on along the road mapped out. This style best fits Mintzbergs professional bureaucracy.
Integration style This fits situations where the result is uncertain. The work is explorative in nature and the various tasks are highly interdependent. It is the managers task to stimulate and motivate. Decision-making is informal, bottom-up. This style promotes creativity, and individuals are challenged to get the best out of themselves. A possible weak spot of this style is that the goals of individual team members become disconnected to those of the project, and that they start to compete with one another. Again, Mintzbergs coordination through mutual adjustment fits this situation well.
Each of the coordination mechanisms and management styles identified may be used within software development projects. It is only reasonable to expect that projects with widely different characteristics ask for different mechanisms. For an experienced team asked to develop a well-specified application in a familiar domain, coordination may be achieved through standardization of work processes. For a complex and innovative application, this mechanism is not likely to work, though.
In chapter 8, we will identify various types of software development project and indicate which type of coordination mechanism and management style best fits those
 
projects. It should be noted that the coordination mechanisms suggested in chapter 8 stem from internal factors, i.e. characteristics of the project on hand. As noted before, the projects environment will also exert influence on its organization.
Notice that we looked from the manager to the team and its members in the above discussion. Alternatively, we may look at the relation and task maturity of individual team members. Relation maturity concerns the attitude of employees towards their job and management. Task maturity is concerned with technical competence. It is important that the manager aligns his dealings with team members with their respective relation and task maturity. For example, a fresh graduate may have high task maturity and low relation maturity, and so his introduction into a skilled team may warrant some careful guidance.
5.2	Team Organization
Within a team, different roles can be distinguished. There are managers, testers, designers, programmers, and so on. Depending on the size of the project, more than one role may be carried out by one person, or different people may play the same role. The responsibilities and tasks of each of these roles have to be precisely defined in the project plan.
People cooperate within a team in order to achieve an optimal result. Yet it is advisable to strictly separate certain roles. It is a good idea to create a test team that is independent of the development team. Similarly, quality assurance should, in principle, be conducted by people not directly involved in the development process.
Large teams are difficult to manage and are therefore often split up into smaller teams. By clearly defining the tasks and responsibilities of the various sub-teams, communication can be largely confined to communication between members of the same sub-team. Quantifying the cost of interpersonal communication yields insights into effects of team size on productivity and helps to structure large development teams effectively. Some simple formulas for doing so are derived in chapter 7.
In the following subsections we discuss several organizational forms for software development teams.
5.2.1	Hierarchical Organization
In an environment which is completely dedicated to the production of software, we often encounter hierarchical team structures. Depending on the size of the organization or project, different levels of management can be distinguished.
Figure 5.2 gives an example of a hierarchical organization. The rectangles denote the various sub-teams in which the actual work is done. Circled nodes denote managers. In this example, two levels of management can be distinguished. At the lower level, different teams are responsible for different parts of the project. The managers at this level have a primary responsibility in coordinating the work within their respective teams. At the higher level, the work of the different teams is coordinated.
 
	Figure 5.2	A hierarchical team organization
This type of hierarchical organization often reflects the global structure of the system to be developed. If the system has three major subsystems, there may be three teams, one for each subsystem, as indicated in figure 5.2. As indicated in this figure, there may also be functional units associated with specific project-wide responsibilities, such as quality assurance and testing.
It is not possible to associate the hierarchical organization with only one of the coordination mechanisms introduced above. For each unit identified, any one of the coordination mechanisms
mentioned earlier is possible. Also, one need not necessarily apply the same mechanism in each node of the hierarchy. Having different coordination mechanisms within one and the same project is not without problems, though.
Based on an analysis of the characteristics of various subsystems, the respective managers may wish to choose a management style and coordination mechanism that best fits those characteristics. If one or more of the subsystems is highly innovative in nature, their management may opt for a mutual adjustment type of coordination. The higher levels within the hierarchy will usually tend towards a coordination mechanism based on some form of standardization, by imposing rules and procedures as in a machine bureaucracy, or measuring output as in a divisionalized configuration. In such cases, internal and external powers may well clash at one or more of the intermediate levels.
Another critical point in any hierarchical organization is the distance between the top and the bottom of the hierarchical pyramid. The real work is generally done at the lower levels of this pyramid. The people at these lower levels generally possess the real knowledge of the application. The higher one rises in the hierarchy, the less specific the knowledge becomes (this is the main reason why management at these higher levels tends towards coordination through standardization). Yet, most decisions are taken at a fairly high level. In many cases, signals from the lower level somehow get subsumed at one of the intermediate levels.
If information seeps through the various levels in the hierarchy, it tends to become more and more rose-colored. The following scenario is not entirely fictitious:
	bottom: we have severe troubles in implementing module X;
	level 1: there are some problems with module X;
	level 2: progress is steady, I do not foresee any real problems;
	top: everything proceeds according to our plan.
These kinds of distortion are difficult to circumvent altogether. They are, however, reinforced by the fact that the organizational line along which progress is reported is also the line along which the performance of team members is measured and evaluated. Everyone is favored by a positive evaluation and is thus inclined to color the reports accordingly. If data on a projects progress is being collected and processed by people not directly involved in the assessment of team members, you have a much higher chance that the information collected is of sufficient reliability.
An equally problematic aspect of hierarchical organizations lies in the fact that one is judged, both socially and financially, according to the level at which one stands within the organization. It is thus natural to aspire to higher and higher levels within the hierarchy. It is, however, not at all clear that this is desirable. The Peter Principle says: in a hierarchical organization each employee in general rises until reaching a level at which he is incompetent. A good programmer need not be a good manager. Good programming requires certain skills. To be a good manager, different skills are needed. In the long run, it seems wiser to maintain people at a level at which they perform well, and reward them accordingly.
5.2.2	Matrix Organization
In an environment where software is a mere byproduct, we often encounter some sort of matrix organization. People from different departments are then allocated to a software development project, possibly part-time. In this type of organization it is sometimes difficult to control progress. An employee has to satisfy several bosses and may have the tendency to play off one boss against another.
We may also use a matrix organization in an environment completely dedicated to software development. The basic unit, then, is a small, specialized group. There may be more than one unit with the same specialization. Possible specializations are, for instance, graphics programming, databases, user interfaces, quality control. The units are organized according to their specialty. Projects, on the other hand, may involve units with different specialties. Individuals are thus organized along two axes, one representing the various specialist groups and one representing the projects to which they are assigned. This type of matrix organization is depicted in figure 5.3.
 
 	 			 	 	
 	 		 	 	 	
 		 	 	 	 	
	
	Figure 5.3	A matrix organization
In such a situation, the project manager is responsible for the successful completion of the project. The manager in charge of one or more units with the same specialty has a longer-term mission, such as maintaining or enlarging the knowledge and expertise of the members of his team. Phrased in terms of the basic management dimensions discussed earlier, the project manager is likely to emphasize task directedness, while the unit manager will emphasize relation directedness. Such an organization can be very effective, provided there is sufficient mutual trust and the willingness to cooperate and pursue the projects goals.
	5.2.3	Chief Programmer Team
A team organization known as the chief programmer team was proposed by Harlan Mills around 1970. The kernel of such a team consists of three people. The chief programmer is team leader. He takes care of the design and implements key parts of the system. The chief programmer has an assistant who can stand in for the chief programmer, if needed. Thirdly, a librarian takes care of the administration and documentation. Besides these three people, an additional (small) number of experts may be added to the chief programmer team.
In this type of organization, fairly high demands are made upon the chief programmer. The chief programmer has to be very competent in the technical area, but he also has to have sufficient management capabilities. In other words, are there enough chief programmers? Also, questions of competence may arise. The chief programmer plays a very central role. He takes all the decisions. The other team members may well challenge some of his qualities.
The early notion of a chief programmer team seems somewhat elitist. It resembles a surgeon team in its emphasis on highly specialized tasks and charismatic leadership. The benefits of a team consisting of a small group of peers over huge development teams struggling to produce ever larger software systems may be regained in a modified form of the chief programmer team though.
In this modified form, peer group aspects prevail. The development team then consists of a small group of people collectively responsible for the task at hand. In particular, jobs are not structured around life cycle stages. There are no analysts, designers, or programmers, though the role of tester may be assigned to a specific person. Different levels of expertise may occur within the group. The most experienced persons act as chief programmer and deputy chief programmer, respectively. At the other end of the scale, one or two trainees can be assimilated and get the necessary on-the-job training. A trainee may well act as the teams librarian.
5.2.4	SWAT Team
In projects with an evolutionary or iterative process model such as RAD, a project organization known as the SWAT team is sometimes used. SWAT stands for Skilled With Advanced Tools. We may view the SWAT team as a software development version of a project team in which both task and relation directedness are high.
A SWAT team is relatively small. It typically has four or five members. Preferably, the team occupies one room. Communication channels are kept very short. The team does not have lengthy formal meetings with formal minutes. Rather, it uses workshops and brainstorming sessions of which little more than a snapshot of a white-board drawing is retained.
A SWAT team typically builds incremental versions of a software system. In order to do so effectively, it employs reusable components, very high-level languages, and powerful software generators. The work of team members is supported and coordinated through groupware or workflow management software.
As in the chief programmer team, the leader of a SWAT team is like a foreman in the building industry: he is both a manager and a co-worker. The members of a SWAT team are generalists. They may have certain specialties, but they must also be able to do a variety of tasks, such as participate in a workshop with customers, build a prototype, and test a piece of software.
Team motivation is very important in a SWAT team. A SWAT team often adopts a catchy name, motto or logo. This label then expresses their vision. Individuals derive pride and self-esteem from their membership of a SWAT team.
5.2.5	Agile Team
Agile approaches to software development grew out of, and have a lot in common with, the various iterative development approaches. In the same vein, an agile team has much in common with, e.g., a SWAT team: collocated, short communication channels, a people-oriented attitude rather than a formalistic one. Often, people work in pairs, with a pilot and co-pilot, but without a hierarchy.
Because agile processes have little discipline enforced on them from the outside, they need discipline to come from within the team. Agile teams need self-discipline. If a pair of programmers develops some code and subsequent tests fail, they must take a step back and redo their work. After they have incorporated a piece of work, they must consider the system as a whole and refactor if needed.
For this to succeed, an agile team needs better people than a team that works according to a planning-driven approach. In a planning-driven approach, the plan works like a life-jacket that people can fall back upon. In an agile team, no such life-jacket is available, and people must have swimming skills. In terms of Cockburns levels of understanding (see Figure 5.4), an agile team requires level 2 or 3 people, and is deemed risky with level 1 people. In planning-driven environments, level 2 or 3 people are only required during the definition stages of development. Thereafter, some level 1 people can be accommodated.
Level	Description
Fluent	3	People at the fluent level move flexibly from one approach to another. As software developers, they are able to revise a method to fit an unprecedented new situation
Detaching
- 2	People at the detaching level are proficient in
a single approach, and ready to learn alternatives. They are able to adapt a method to a precedented new situation
Following
- 1	People at the following level obey a single approach and get confused when confronted with something new. They are able to perform method steps, such as composing a pattern or running tests.
	Figure 5.4	Levels of understanding
	5.2.6	Open Source Software Development
One of the early books on open source software development is titled The Cathedral and the Bazaar (Raymond, 1999). The cathedral refers to traditional, heavyweight, hierarchical software development as is common in closed source software development. Conversely, open source software development is like a bazaar: hordes of anarchist developers casually organized in a virtual networked organization. The bazaar metaphor was chosen to reflect the babbling, chatting, seemingly unorganized form of the middle-Eastern marketplace. Though the bazaar metaphor may fit some open source development groups, many successful open source communities have adopted the more organized onion-like structure depicted in figure 5.5.
In the onion-shaped structure of an open source community, four layers of participation are distinguished:
The Core Team consists of a small team of experienced developers that also acts as management team. Changes in kernel components of the software can only be made by members of the Core Team.
 
	Figure 5.5	Onion shaped structure of an open source community
The Co-Developers are a larger group of people surrounding the Core Team. Co-Developers review code and do bug fixes.
The Active Users are users of the most recent release of the system. They submit bug reports and feature requests, but do not themselves program the system.
Finally, the group of Passive Users is merely using stable releases of the software. They do not interact with the developers.
Usually, outer layers contain more people than inner layers. Often, the Core Team counts no more than 5-15 people. For example, Mockus et al. (2000) reports that the 15-person Core Team of Apache did over 80% of functionality coding.
This type of open source project organization is a meritrocacy; i.e., roles of people are based on talent and proven quality. People in one layer may move up to the next higher layer. Getting to the core is achieved by a process of earning trust, responsibility and status through competition and demonstrated talent. For example, an active user may become co-developer by suggesting quality improvements over a period of time. Likewise, a longstanding record of quality fixes to the code may earn him or her a position in the core team.
The voluntary character of open source development gives rise to some specific challenges:
	Motivation to remain active
	Disagreement between developers
	Communication between developers
An open source community is a company without walls (Fang and Neufeld, 2006). People may freely enter and leave the community. Developers participating in open source projects rarely do so selflessly. They expect something in return, such as the ability to learn new things, a higher status within their normal job, attention because they are part of a successful project, and the like. This should come as no surprise. Software professionals have high growth needs (Couger and Zawacki, 1980). Open source projects that challenge developer skills, have a well-modularized code base, and make use of advanced tools have a higher chance of attarcting a sustainable community.
One of the worst things that may happen to an open source project is disagreement between developers. A common obstacle in open source projects is disagreement about development speed Godfrey and Tu (2000). Some developers may want to issue new releases frequently, while others may take a more cautionary stand. Another potential source of disagreement is when users start to feel uncomfortable by the undemocratic democracy of open source projects. Although many people may submit bug fixes or feature requests, the power of what actually happens usually lies with one or a few people in the Core Team. If submissions of a developer get rejected time and again, he may get frustrated and leave the community or decide to create a fork: the developer takes a copy of the source code and starts an independent development track.
Communication between developers is an issue in every distributed team. But in open source projects, the situation is worse because of the floating community membership and the lack of formal documentation. A clear modularization of the code is an important means to reduce the need for extensive communication. Open source communities further tend to use configuration control tools and mailing lists for communication.
	5.2.7	General Principles for Organizing a Team
No matter how we try to organize a team, the key point is that it ought to be a team. From many tests regarding productivity in software development projects, it turns out again and again that factors concerning team capabilities have a far greater influence than anything else. Factors such as morale, group norms and management style play a more important role than such things as the use of high-level languages, product complexity, and the like (see, for instance, (Lawrence, 1981)).
Some general principles for team organization are given in (Koontz and ODonnell, 1972). In particular, these general principles also apply to the organization of software development projects:
Use fewer, and better, people Highest productivity is achieved by a relatively small group of people. This holds for novelists, soccer players and bricklayers. There is no reason to believe that it does not equally apply to programmers
 
5.3. SUMMARY
and other people working in the software field. Also, large groups require more communication, which has a negative effect on productivity and leads to more errors.
Try to fit tasks to the capabilities and motivation of the people available In other words: take care that the Peter Principle does not apply in your situation. In many organizations, excellent programmers can be promoted only into managerial positions. It is far better to also offer career possibilities in the more technical areas of software development and maintenance.
In the long run, an organization is better off if it helps people to get the most out of themselves So you should not pursue either of the following:
	The reverse Peter Principle: people rise within an organization to a level at which they become indispensable. For instance, a programmer may become the only expert in a certain system. If he does not get a chance to work on anything else, it is not unlikely that this person, for want of a more interesting and challenging task, will leave your organization. At that point, you are in real trouble.
	The Paul Principle: people rise in an organization to a level at which their expertise becomes obsolete within five years. Given the speed with which new developments enter the market place in software engineering, and computer science in general, it is very important that people get the opportunity to grow and stay abreast of new developments.
It is wise to select people such that a well-balanced and harmonious team results In general, this means that it is not sufficient only to have a few top experts. A soccer team needs regular players as well as stars. Selecting the proper mix of people is a complicated task. There are various good texts available that specifically address this question (for example, (Weinberg, 1971), (Metzger, 1987)).
Someone who does not fit the team should be removed If it turns out that a team does not function as a coherent unit, we are often inclined to wait a little while, see how things develop, and hope for better times to come. In the long run, this is detrimental.
5.3	Summary
Software is written by humans. Their productivity is partly determined by such factors as the programming language used, machine speed, and available tools. The organizational environment in which one is operating is equally important, though. Good team management distinguishes itself from bad team management above all by the degree to which attention is paid to these human factors. The human element in software project management was discussed in section 5.1, together with well-known taxonomies of coordination mechanisms and management styles.
There are different ways to organize software developers in a team. These organizational forms and some of their caveats were discussed in section 5.2. Hierarchical and matrix organizations are not specific to software development, while the chief programmer, SWAT and agile teams originated in the software field. Each of the latter somehow tries to reconcile the two types of management typically required in software development projects: an individualistic, personal approach where one tries to get the best out of team members, and a hierarchical, top-down management style to get things done in time and within budget. Successful open source projects usually have an onion-shaped organization.
5.4	Further Reading
A still very relevant source of information on psychological factors related to software development is (Weinberg, 1971). (Brooks, 1995) and (DeMarco and Lister, 1999) also contain a number of valuable observations. Coordination problems in software development are discussed in (Kraut and Streeter, 1995). (Software, 1996a) and (CACM, 1993b) are special journal issues on managing software projects.
(Mintzberg, 1983) is the classic text on the organization of management. The basic management styles discussed in section 5.1.2 are based on (Reddin, 1970) and (Constantine, 1993).
The chief programmer team is described in (Baker, 1972). Its modified form is described in (Macro and Buxton, 1987). SWAT is discussed in (Martin, 1991). Agile teams are described in, amongst others, (Highsmith, 2004). The three levels of understanding are discussed in (Cockburn, 2002). (Software, 2005) contains a number of articles on how to adopt agile methods.
(SPIP, 2006) contains a collection of articles on open source development processes. Crowston and Howison (2006) discuss the health of open source communities. Aberdour (2007) discusses ways to achieve quality in open source software development.
Exercises
1.	Explain Mintzbergs classification of organizational configurations and their associated coordination mechanisms.
2.	Discuss Reddins basic management styles.
3.	What are the critical issues in a hierarchical team organization?
4.	Highlight the differences between a chief programmer team, a SWAT team and an agile team.
5.4. FURTHER READING
5.	Which of Reddins management styles fits in best with an agile team?
6.	What is the Peter Principle? Where does it crop up in software development?
7.	Why would an agile team need better people than a team following a planning-based approach?
8.	Consider a software development project you have been involved in. Which style of coordination mechanism or management style best fits this project? Do you consider the management to have been adequate, or does the discussion in section 5.1 point to possible improvements?
9.	From a management point of view, discuss possible pros and cons of having a technical wizard on your development team.
10.	Write an essay on the role of people issues in software development. To do so, you may consult some of the books that focus on people issues in software development, such as (Brooks, 1995), (Weinberg, 1971) or (DeMarco and Lister, 1999).
11.	Discuss the pros and cons of an organization in which the primary departmentalization is vertical (i.e. by specialty, such as databases, human-computer interfaces, or graphics programming) as opposed to one in which the primary departmentalization is horizontal (for example, design, implementation, and testing).
12.	Write an essay on how open source software development projects are managed.
13.	Discuss the pros and cons of letting people rotate between projects from different application domains as opposed to letting them become true experts in one particular application domain.
 
6 On Managing Software Quality
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To appreciate the need for sound measurements in determining software quality
To critically assess various taxonomies of quality attributes
To be able to contrast different views on software quality
To be aware of international standards pertaining to software quality
To know about the Capability Maturity Model
To understand how an organization may set up its own measurement program Software quality is an important topic. With the increasing penetration of automation in everyday life, more and more people are coming into contact with software systems, and the quality of those systems is a major concern. Quality cannot be added as an afterthought. It has to be built in from the very beginning. This chapter discusses the many dimensions of quality of both the software product and the software process.
In their landmark book In Search of Excellence, Peters and Waterman identify a number of key factors that set the very successful companies of the world apart from the less successful ones. One of those key factors is the commitment to quality of the very successful companies. Apparently, quality pays off.
Long-term profitability is not the only reason why attention to quality is important in software development. Because of the sheer complexity of software products and the often frequent changes that have to be incorporated during the development of software, continuous attention to, and assessment of, the quality of the product under development is needed if we ever want to realize satisfactory products. This need is aggravated by the increasing penetration of software technology into everyday life. Low-quality products will leave customers dissatisfied, will make users neglect the systems that are supposed to support their work, and may even cost lives.
One frightening example of what may happen if software contains bugs, has become known as Malfunction 54. The Therac-25, a computerized radiation machine, was blamed in incidents that caused the death of two people and serious injuries to others. The deadly mystery was eventually traced back to a software bug, named Malfunction 54 after the message displayed at the console; see also section 1.4.2. Commitment to quality in software development not only pays off, it is a sheer necessity.
This commitment calls for careful development processes. This attention to the development process is based on the premise that the quality of a product is largely based on the quality of the process that leads to that product, and that this process can indeed be defined, managed, measured, and improved.
Besides the product--process dichotomy, a conformance--improvement dichotomy can be distinguished as well. If we impose certain quality requirements on the product or process, we may devise techniques and procedures to ensure or test that the product or process does indeed conform to these objectives. Alternatively, schemes may be aimed at improving the quality of the product or process.
Figure 6.1 gives examples of these four different approaches to quality. Most of software engineering is concerned with improving the quality of the products we develop, and the label best practices in this figure refers to all of the goodies mentioned elsewhere in this book. The other three approaches are discussed in this chapter.
Before we embark on a discussion of the different approaches to quality, we will first elaborate on the notion of software quality itself, and how to measure it. When
	 	 	
 	 	 	
 	 	 	
	
	Figure 6.1	Different approaches to quality
talking about the height of people, the phrase Jasper is 7 ft conveys more information than Jasper is tall. Likewise, we would like to express all kinds of quality attributes in numbers. We would prefer a statement of the form The availability of the system is 99% to a mere The availability of the system is high. Some of the caveats of the measurement issues involved are discussed in section 6.1. In section 6.2, we will discuss various taxonomies of quality attributes, including ISO 9126. This is by no means the final word on software quality, but it is a good reference point to start from. This discussion also allows us to further illustrate some of the problems with measuring quality in quantitative terms.
Software quality is a rather elusive notion. Different people will have different perspectives on the quality of a software system. A system tester may view quality as compliance to requirements, whereas a user may view it as fitness for use. Both viewpoints are valid, but they need not coincide. As a matter of fact, they probably wont. Part of the confusion about what the quality of a system entails and how it should be assessed, is caused by mixing up these different perspectives. Rather than differentiating between various perspectives on quality, Total Quality Management (TQM) advocates an eclectic view: quality is the pursuit of excellence in everything. Section 6.3 elaborates on the different perspectives on quality.
ISO, the International Standards Organization, has established several standards that pertain to the management of quality. The one most applicable to our field, the development and maintenance of software, is ISO 9001. This standard will be discussed in section 6.4.
ISO 9001 can be augmented by more specific procedures, aimed specifically at quality assurance and control for software development. The IEEE Standard for Quality Assurance Plans is meant to provide such procedures. It is discussed in section 6.5.
Software quality assurance procedures provide the means to review and audit the software development process and its products. Quality assurance by itself does not guarantee quality products. Quality assurance merely sees to it that work is done the
 
way it is supposed to be done.
The Capability Maturity Model (CMM)  is the best known attempt at directions on how to improve the development process. It uses a five-point scale to rate organizations and indicates key areas of focus in order to progress to a higher maturity level. SPICE and Bootstrap are similar approaches to process improvement. CMM is discussed in section 6.6.
Quality actions within software development organizations are aimed at finding opportunities to improve the development process. These improvements require an understanding of the development process, which can be obtained only through carefully collecting and interpreting data that pertain to quality aspects of the process and its products. Some hints on how to start such a quality improvement program are given in section 6.8.
6.1	On Measures and Numbers
When you can measure what you are speaking about, and express it in numbers, you know something about it; but when you cannot measure it, when you cannot express it in numbers, your knowledge is of a meagre and unsatisfactory kind; it may be the beginning of knowledge, but you have scarcely in your thoughts advanced to the stage of science.
[Lord Kelvin, 1900]
It is the mark of an instructed mind to rest satisfied with the degree of precision which the nature of a subject admits, and not to seek exactness when only an approximation of the truth is possible.
[Aristotle, 330 BC]
Suppose we want to express some quality attribute, say the complexity of a program text, in a single numeric value. Larger values are meant to denote more complex programs. If such a mapping from programs to numbers can be found, we may next compare the values of and to decide whether program is more complex than program . Since more complex programs will be more difficult to comprehend and maintain, this type of information is very useful, e.g. for planning maintenance effort.
What then should this mapping be? Consider the program texts in figure 6.2. Most people will concur that text (a) looks less complex than text (b). Is this caused by:
	its length,
	the number of gotos,
	the number of if-statements,
1	procedure bubble
2	(var a: array [1..n] of integer; n: integer);
3	var i, j, temp: integer;
4	begin
5	for i:= 2 to n do
6	j:= i;
(a)	7	while j	1 and a[j]	a[j-1] do
8	temp:= a[j];
9	a[j]:= a[j-1];
10	a[j-1]:= temp;
11	j:= j-1;
12	enddo
13	enddo
14	end;
1	procedure bubble
2	(var a: array [1..n] of integer; n: integer);
3	var i, j, temp: integer;
4	begin
5	for i:= 2 to n do
6	if a[i]	a[i-1] then goto next endif;
7	j:= i;
8	loop: if j	1 then goto next endif;
(b)	9	if a[j]	a[j-1] then goto next endif;
10	temp:= a[j];
11	a[j]:= a[j-1];
12	a[j-1]:= temp;
13	j:= j-1;
14	goto loop;
15	next: skip;
16	enddo
17	end;
	Figure 6.2	Two versions of a sort routine (a) structured, (b) unstructured
	a combination of these attributes,
	something else?
Suppose we decide that the number of if-statements is what counts. The result of the mapping then is 0 for text (a) and 3 for text (b), and this agrees with our intuition. However, if we take the sum of the number of if-statements, gotos, and loops, the result also agrees with our intuition. Which of these mappings is the one sought for? Is either of them valid to begin with? What does valid mean in this context?
A number of relevant aspects of measurement, such as attributes, units and scale types can be introduced and related to one another using the measurement framework depicted in figure 6.3. This framework also allows us to indicate how metrics can be used to describe and predict properties of products and processes, and how to validate these predictions.
 
Figure 6.3 A measurement framework (Source: B. Kitchenham, S. Lawrence Pfleeger & N. Fenton, Towards a Framework for Software Measurement Validation, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 21, 12 (1995) 1995 IEEE)
The model in figure 6.3 has seven constituents:
Entity An entity is an object in the real world of which we want to know or predict certain properties. Entities need not denote material objects; projects and software are entities too.
Attribute Entities have certain properties which we call attributes. Different entities may have the same attribute: both people and cars have a weight. And of course a single entity can have more than one attribute. The forks that adorn the arrow labeled has
in figure 6.3 indicate that this relationship is n-to-m.
Attribute relation Different attributes of one or more entities can be related. For example, the attributes length and weight of an entity snake are related. Similarly, the number of man-months spent on a project is related to the cost of that project. Also, an attribute of one entity can be related to an attribute of another entity. For example, the experience of a programmer may be related to the cost of a development project he is working on.
Value The former three constituents of the model reside in the real world. We want to formally characterize these objects by measuring attributes, i.e. assigning values to them.
Unit Obviously, this value is expressed in a certain unit, such as meters, seconds or lines of code.
Scale types This unit in turn belongs to a certain scale type. Some common scale types are:
	Nominal Attributes are merely classified: the color of my hair is gray, white or black.
	Ordinal There is a (linear) ordering in the possible values of an attribute: one type of material is harder than another, one program is more complex than another.
	Interval The same as ordinal, but the distance between successive values of an attribute is the same, as in a calendar, or the temperature measured in degrees Fahrenheit.
	Ratio The same as interval, with the additional requirement that there exists a value 0, as in the age of a software system, or the temperature measured in degrees Kelvin.
	Absolute In this case we simply count the number of occurrences, as in the number of errors detected in a program.
Note that we can sometimes measure an attribute in different units, where these units lie on different scales. For example, we can measure temperature on an ordinal scale: it either freezes, or it doesnt. We can also measure it on an interval scale: in degrees Fahrenheit or Celsius. Or we can measure it on a ratio scale: in degrees Kelvin.
Attribute-relation model If there exists a relation between different attributes of, possibly different, entities in the real world, we may express that relation in a formal model: the attribute-relation model. This model computes (predicts) the value of an attribute in which we are interested from the values of one or more other attributes from the model. The fork at the arrow labeled formalizes in figure 6.3 indicates that we can have more than one model for the same attribute relation.
Measurement is a mapping from the empirical, real world to the formal, relational world. A measure is the number or symbol assigned to an attribute of an entity by this mapping. The value assigned obviously has a certain unit, e.g. lines of code. The unit in turn belongs to a certain scale, such as the ratio scale for lines of code, or the ordinal scale for the severity of a failure.
In mathematics, the term metric has a very specific meaning: it describes how far apart two points are. In our field, the term is often used in a somewhat sloppy way. Sometimes it denotes a measure, sometimes the unit of a measure. We will use the term to denote the combination of:
	an attribute of an entity,
	the function which assigns a value to that attribute,
	the unit in which this value is expressed, and
	its scale type.
For each scale type, certain operations are allowed, while others are not. In particular, we can not compute the average for an ordinal scale, but only its median (middle value). Suppose we classify a system as either very complex, complex, average, simple or very simple. The assignment of numbers to these values is rather arbitrary. The only prerequisite is that a system that is classified as, say, very complex is assigned a larger value than a system classified as, say, complex. If we call this mapping , the only requirement thus is: (very complex) (complex) (very simple). Table 6.1 Example mappings for an ordinal scale
Very complex	Complex	Average	Simple	Very simple
5	4	3	2	1
100	10	5	2	1
Table 6.1 gives an example of two valid assignments of values to this attribute. Suppose we have a system with three components, which are characterized as very complex, average and simple, respectively. By assigning the values from the first row, the average would be 3, so the whole system would be classified to be of average complexity. Using the values from the second row, the average would be 35, something between complex and very complex. The problem is caused by the fact that, with an ordinal scale, we do not know whether successive values are equidistant. When computing an average, we tacitly assume they are.
We often can not measure the value of an attribute directly. For example, the speed of a car can be determined from the values of two other attributes: a distance and the time it takes the car to travel that distance. The speed is then measured indirectly, by taking the quotient of two direct measures. In this case, the attribute-relation model formalizes the relation between the distance traveled, time, and speed.
We may distinguish between internal and external attributes. Internal attributes of an entity can be measured purely in terms of that entity itself. Modularity, size, defects encountered, and cost are typical examples of internal attributes. External attributes of an entity are those which can be measured only with respect to how that entity relates to its environment. Maintainability and usability are examples of external attributes. Most quality factors we discuss in this chapter are external attributes. External attributes can be measured only indirectly, since they involve the measurement of other attributes.
Empirical relations between objects in the real world should be preserved in the numerical relation system that we use. If we observe that car drives faster than car
, then we would rather like our function which maps the speed observed to some number to be such that . This is called the representation condition.
If a measure satisfies the representation condition, it is said to be a valid measure.
The representation condition can sometimes be checked by a careful assessment of the attribute-relation model. For example, we earlier proposed to measure the complexity of a program text by counting the number of if-statements. For this (indirect) measure to be valid we have to ascertain that:
	any two programs with the same number of if-statements are equally complex, and
	if program has more if-statements than program , then is more complex than .
Since neither of these statements is true in the real world, this complexity measure is not valid.
The validity of more complex indirect measures is usually ascertained through statistical means. Most of the cost estimation models discussed in chapter 7, for example, are validated in this way.
Finally, the scale type of indirect measures merits some attention. If different measures are combined into a new measure, the scale type of the combined measure is the weakest of the scale types of its constituents. Many cost estimation formulas contain factors whose scale type is ordinal, such as the instability of the requirements or the experience of the design team. Strictly speaking, different values that result from applying such a cost estimation formula should then be interpreted as indicating that certain projects require more effort than others. The intention though is to interpret them on a ratio scale, i.e. actual effort in man-months. From a measurement-theory point of view, this is not allowed.
 
6.2	A Taxonomy of Quality Attributes
Some of the first elaborate studies on the notion of software quality appeared in the late 1970s (McCall et al., 1977), (Boehm et al., 1978). In these studies, a number of aspects of software systems are investigated that somehow relate to the notion of software quality. In the ensuing years, a large number of people have tried to tackle this very same problem. Many taxonomies of quality factors have been published. The fundamental problems have not been solved satisfactorily, though. The various factors that relate to software quality are hard to define. It is even harder to measure them quantitatively. On the other hand, real quality can often be identified surprisingly easily.
In the IEEE Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology, quality is defined as the degree to which a system, component, or process meets customer or user needs or expectations. Applied to software, then, quality should be measured primarily against the degree to which user requirements are met: correctness, reliability, usability, and the like. Software lasts a long time and is adapted from time to time in order to accommodate changed circumstances. It is important to the user that this is possible within reasonable costs. The customer is therefore also interested in quality factors which relate to the structure of the system rather than its use: maintainability, testability, portability, etc.
We will start our discussion of quality attributes with McCalls taxonomy. McCall distinguishes between two levels of quality attributes. Higher-level quality attributes, known as quality factors, are external attributes and can, therefore, be measured only indirectly. McCall introduced a second level of quality attributes, termed quality criteria. Quality criteria can be measured either subjectively or objectively. By combining the ratings for the individual quality criteria that affect a given quality factor, we obtain a measure for the extent to which that quality factor is being satisfied. Users and managers tend to be interested in the higher-level, external quality attributes.
For example, we can not directly measure the reliability of a software system. We may however directly measure the number of defects encountered so far. This direct measure can be used to obtain insight into the reliability of the system. This involves a theory of how the number of defects encountered relates to reliability, which can be ascertained on good grounds. For most other aspects of quality though, the relation between the attributes that can be measured directly and the external attributes we are interested in is less obvious, to say the least.
Table 6.2 lists the quality factors and their definitions, as they are used by McCall et al.  These quality factors can be broadly categorized into three classes. The first class contains those factors that pertain to the use of the software after it has become Table 6.2 Quality factors (Source: J.A. McCall, P.K. Richards & G.F. Walters, Factors in Software Quality, RADC-TR-77-369, US Department of Commerce, 1977.)
 
Correctness: The extent to which a program satisfies its specifications and fulfills the users mission objectives.
Reliability: The extent to which a program can be expected to perform its intended function with required precision.
Efficiency: The amount of computing resources and code required by a program to perform a function.
Integrity: The extent to which access to software or data by unauthorized persons can be controlled.
Usability: The effort required to learn, operate, prepare input, and interpret output of a program.
Maintainability: The effort required to locate and fix an error in an operational program.
Testability: The effort required to test a program to ensure that it performs its intended function.
Flexibility: The effort required to modify an operational program.
Portability: The effort required to transfer a program from one hardware and/or software environment to another.
Reusability: The extent to which a program (or parts thereof) can be reused in other applications.
Interoperability: The effort required to couple one system with another.
 
operational. The second class pertains to the maintainability of the system. The third class contains factors that reflect the ease with which a transition to a new environment can be made. These three categories are depicted in table 6.3.
In ISO standard 9126, a similar effort has been made to define a set of quality characteristics and sub-characteristics (see table 6.4). Their definitions are given in tables 6.5 and 6.6. Whereas the quality factors and criteria as defined by McCall and others are heavily interrelated, the
ISO scheme is hierarchical: each sub-characteristic is related to exactly one characteristic.
The ISO quality characteristics strictly refer to a software product. Their definitions do not capture process quality issues. For example, security can partly be handled by provisions in the software and partly by proper procedures. Only the former is covered by the sub-characteristic security of the ISO scheme. Furthermore, the sub-characteristics concern quality aspects that are visible to the user. Reusability, for example, is not included in the ISO scheme.
Table 6.3 Three categories of software quality factors (Source: J.A. McCall, P.K. Richards & G.F. Walters, Factors in Software Quality, RADC-TR-77-369, US Department of Commerce, 1977.)
 
Product operation:
Correctness	Does it do what I want?
Reliability	Does it do it accurately all of the time?
Efficiency	Will it run on my hardware as well as it can?
Integrity	Is it secure?
Usability Product revision:	Can I run it?
Maintainability	Can I fix it?
Testability	Can I test it?
Flexibility
Product transition:	Can I change it?
Portability	Will I be able to use it on another machine?
Reusability	Will I be able to reuse some of the software?
Interoperability	Will I be able to interface it with another system?
 
The ISO characteristics and subcharacteristics, together with an extensive set of measures, make up ISOs external and internal quality model. Internal quality refers to the product itself, ultimately the source code. External quality refers to the quality when the software is executed. For example, the average number of statements in a method is a measure of internal quality, while the number of defects encountered during testing is a measure of external quality.
Ultimately, the user is interested in the quality in use, defined in (ISO9126, 2001) as the users view of the quality of the software product when it is executed in a specific environment and a specific context of use. It measures the extent to which users can achieve their goals, rather than mere properties of the software (see also section 6.3). Quality in use is modeled in four characteristics: effectiveness, productivity, safety, and satisfaction. The definitions for these quality in use characteristics are given in table 6.7.
Theoretically, internal quality, external quality and quality in use are linked together: internal quality indicates external quality, which in turn indicates quality in use. In general, meeting criteria at one level is not sufficient for meeting criteria at the next level. For instance, satisfaction is partly determined by internal and external quality measures, but also includes the users attitude towards the product. The latter has to be measured separately. Note that internal quality and external quality can be measured directly. Quality in use can in general only be measured indirectly.
Table 6.4 Quality characteristics and sub-characteristics of the external and internal quality model of ISO 9126
Characteristic	Subcharacteristics
Functionality	Suitability
Accuracy
Interoperability
Security
Functionality compliance
Reliability	Maturity
Fault tolerance
Recoverability
Reliability compliance
Usability	Understandability
Learnability
Operability
Attractiveness
Usability compliance
Efficiency	Time behavior
Resource utilization
Efficiency compliance
Maintainability	Analyzability
Changeability
Stability
Testability
Maintainability compliance
Portability	Adaptability
Installability
Co-existence
Replaceability
Portability compliance
Table 6.5 Quality characteristics of the external and internal quality model of ISO 9126 (Source: ISO Standard 9126: Software Quality Characteristics and Metrics.
Reproduced by permission of ISO.)
 
Functionality: The capability of the software product to provide functions which meet stated and implied needs when the software is used under specified conditions.
Reliability: The capability of the software product to maintain a specified level of performance when used under specified conditions.
Usability: The capability of the software product to be understood, learned, used and be attractive to the user, when used under specified conditions.
Efficiency: The capability of the software product to provide appropriate performance, relative to the amount of resources used, under stated conditions.
Maintainability: The capability of the software product to be modified. Modifications may include corrections, improvements or adaptation of the software to changes in environment, and in requirements and functional specifications.
Portability: The capability of the software product to be transferred from one environment to another.
 
continued on next page
Table 6.6 Quality sub-characteristics of the external and internal quality model of ISO 9126 (Source: ISO Standard 9126: Software Quality Characteristics and Metrics.
Reproduced by permission of ISO.)
 
Suitability: The capability of the software product to provide an appropriate set of functions for specified tasks and user objectives.
Accuracy: The capability of the software product to provide the right or agreed results or effects with the needed degree of precision.
Interoperability: The capability of the software product to interact with one or more specified systems.
Security: The capability of the software product to protect information and data so that unauthorised persons or systems cannot read or modify them and authorised persons or systems are not denied access to them.
Functionality compliance: The capability of the software product to adhere to standards, conventions or regulations in laws and similar prescriptions relating to functionality.
Maturity: The capability of the software product to avoid failure as a result of faults in the software.
Fault tolerance: The capability of the software product to maintain a specified level of performance in cases of software faults or of infringement of its specified interface.
Recoverability: The capability of the software product to re-establish a specified level of performance and recover the data directly affected in the case of a failure. Reliability compliance: The capability of the software product to adhere to standards, conventions or regulations relating to reliability.
Understandability: The capability of the software product to enable the user to understand whether the software is suitable, and how it can be used for particular tasks and conditions of use.
Learnability: The capability of the software product to enable the user to learn its application.
Operability: The capability of the software product to enable the user to operate and control it.
Attractiveness: The capability of the software product to be attractive to the user.
Usability compliance: The capability of the software product to adhere to standards, conventions, style guides or regulations relating to usability
 
 
Time behavior: The capability of the software product to provide appropriate response and processing times and throughput rates when performing its function, under stated conditions.
Resource utilization: The capability of the software product to use appropriate amounts and types of resources when the software performs its function under stated conditions.
Efficiency compliance: The capability of the software product to adhere to standards or conventions relating to efficiency.
Analysability: The capability of the software product to be diagnosed for deficiencies or causes of failures in the software, or for the parts to be modified to be identified.
Changeability: The capability of the software product to enable a specified modification to be implemented.
Stability: The capability of the software product to avoid unexpected effects from modifications of the software.
Testability: The capability of the software product to enable modified software to be validated.
Maintainability compliance: The capability of the software product to adhere to standards or conventions relating to maintainability.
Adaptability: The capability of the software product to be adapted for different specified environments without applying actions or means other than those provided for this purpose for the software considered.
Installability: The capability of the software product to be installed in a specified environment.
Co-existence: The capability of the software product to co-exist with other independent software in a common environment sharing common resources. Replaceability: The capability of the software product to be used in place of another specified software product for the same purpose in the same environment.
Portability compliance: The capability of the software product to adhere to standards or conventions relating to portability.
 
Quality factors are not independent. Some factors will impact one another in a positive sense, while others will do so negatively. An example from the first category is reliability versus correctness. Efficiency, on the other hand, will in general have a negative impact on most other quality factors. This means that we will have to make trade-offs between quality factors. If high requirements are decided upon for one factor, we may have to relax others. These tradeoffs are to be resolved at an early stage. An important objective of the software architecture phase is to bring these quality factors to the forefront and make the tradeoffs explicit, so that the stakeholders know what they are in for (see chapter 11). By doing so, we are better able to build in the desired qualities, as opposed to merely assess them after the fact.
Table 6.7	Quality characteristics of the quality in use model of ISO 9126 (Source: ISO Standard 9126: Software Quality Characteristics and Metrics. Reproduced by permission of ISO.)
 
Effectiveness: The capability of the software product to enable users to achieve specified goals with accuracy and completeness in a specified context of use.
Productivity: The capability of the software product to enable users to expend appropriate amounts of resources in relation to the effectiveness achieved in a specified context of use.
Safety: The capability of the software product to achieve acceptable levels of risk of harm to people, business, software, property or the environment in a specified context of use.
Satisfaction: The capability of the software product to satisfy users in a specified context of use.
 
	6.3	Perspectives on Quality
What I (and everybody else) mean by the word quality cannot be broken down into subjects and predicates [. . . ] If quality exists in an object, then you must explain why scientific instruments are unable to detect it [. . . ] On the other hand, if quality is subjective, existing only [in the eye of] the observer, then this Quality is just a fancy name for whatever youd like [. . . ] Quality is not objective. It doesnt reside in the material world [. . . ] Quality is not subjective. It doesnt reside merely in the mind.
[Robert Pirsig, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, 1974]
Users will judge the quality of a software system by the degree to which it helps them accomplish tasks and by the sheer joy they have in using it. The manager of those users is likely to judge the quality of the same system by its benefits. These benefits can be expressed in cost savings or in a better and faster service to clients.
During testing, the prevailing quality dimensions will be the number of defects found and removed, or the reliability measured, or the conformance to specifications. To the maintenance programmer, quality will be related to the systems complexity, its technical documentation, and the like.
These different viewpoints are all valid. They are also difficult to reconcile. Garvin distinguishes five definitions of software quality:
Transcendent definition
User-based definition
Product-based definition
Manufacturing-based definition
 
6.3. PERSPECTIVES ON QUALITY
Value-based definition.
Transcendent quality concerns innate excellence. It is the type of quality assessment we usually apply to novels. We may consider Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance an excellent book, we may try to give words to our admiration but these words are usually inadequate. The practiced reader gradually develops a good feeling for this type of quality. Likewise, the software engineering expert may have developed a good feeling for the transcendent qualities of software systems.
The user-based definition of quality concerns fitness for use and relates to the degree in which a system addresses the users needs. It is a subjective notion. Since different users may have different needs, they may assess a systems quality rather differently. The incidental user of a simple word-processing package may be quite happy with its functionality and possibilities while a computer scientist may be rather disappointed. The reverse situation may befall a complex system like LATEX.
In the product-based definition, quality relates to attributes of the software. Differences in quality are caused by differences in the values of those attributes. Most of the research into software quality concerns this type of quality. It also underlies the various taxonomies of quality attributes discussed above.
The manufacturing-based definition concerns conformance to specifications. It is the type of quality definition used during system testing, whereas the user-based definition is prevalent during acceptance testing.
Finally, the value-based definition deals with costs and profits. It concerns balancing time and cost on the one hand, and profit on the other hand. We may distinguish various kinds of benefit, not all of which can be phrased easily in monetary terms:
Increased efficiency Benefits are attributed to cost avoidance or reduction, and their measures are economic.
Increased effectiveness This is primarily reflected through better information for decision making. It can be measured in economic terms or through key performance indicators, such as a reduced time to market.
Added value Benefits enhance the strategic position of the organization, e.g. through an increased market share. The contribution of the information technology component often can not be isolated.
Marketable product The system itself may be marketable, or a marketable product may be identified as a by-product of system development.
Corporate IT infrastructure Communication networks, database environments and the like provide little benefit by themselves, but serve as a foundation for other systems.
Software developers tend to concentrate on the product-based and manufacturingbased definitions of quality. The resulting quality requirements can be expressed in quantifiable terms, such as the number of defects found per man-month, or the number of decisions per module. The quality attributes discussed in the previous section fall into these categories. Such quality requirements however can not be directly mapped onto the, rather subjective, quality viewpoints of the users, such as fitness for use. Nevertheless, users and software developers will have to come to an agreement on the quality requirements to be met.
One way to try to bridge this gap is to define a common language between users and software developers in which quality requirements can be expressed. This approach is taken in (Bass et al., 2003), where quality requirements are expressed in so-called quality-attribute scenarios. Figure 6.4 gives one example of how a quality attribute can be expressed in user terms. Quality attribute scenarios have a role not only in specifying requirements, but also in testing whether these requirements are (going to be) met. For example, quality attribute scenarios are heavily used in architecture assessments (see also chapter 11).
 
Quality attribute: Usability
Source: End user
Stimulus: Learn system features
Artifact: System
Environment: At runtime
Response: Learn tasks supplied by the system for new employees
Response measure: days on the job
Test: 90% successful completion of assigned tasks in employee test for the system, within twice the average time of an experienced user
Worst: 1 to 7 days
Plan: less than 1 day (to passing of test)
Best: less than 2 hours
 
	Figure 6.4	A quality attribute scenario that can be used by both users and developers
Quality is not only defined at the level of the whole system. In component-based development, quality is defined at the level of a component. For services, quality is defined at the level of an individual service. The environment of the component or service, i.e. some other component or service, will require certain qualities as well. So for components and services, there is a requires and a provides aspect to quality. Since a component or service generally does not know the context in which it is going to be embedded, it is difficult to decide on the right quality level. One might
6.3. PERSPECTIVES ON QUALITY
then choose to offer different levels of quality. For example, a service handling video streaming may be fast with low image quality, or slow with high image quality. The user of that service then selects the appropriate quality of service (QoS) level.
Developers tend to have a mechanistic, product-oriented view on quality, whereby quality is associated with features of the product. In this view, quality is defined by looking from the program to the user (user friendliness, acceptability, etc.). To assess the quality of systems used in organizations, we have to adopt a process-oriented view on quality as well, where quality is defined by looking from the user to the program. This leads to notions like adequacy and relevance. For example, a helpdesk staffed with skilled people may contribute considerably to the quality of a system as perceived by its users, but this quality attribute generally does not follow from a product-based view on quality.
A very eclectic view on quality is taken in Total Quality Management (TQM). In TQM, quality applies to each and every aspect of the organization, and it is pursued by each and every employee of that organization. TQM has three cornerstones:
1.	Customer value strategy Quality is a combination of benefits derived from a product and sacrifices required of the customer. The right balance between these benefits and sacrifices has to be sought. The key stakeholder in this balancing act is the customer, rather than the customers boss. The attitude is not We know what is best for the customer, but Lets first determine what the customer needs.
2.	Organizational systems Systems encompass more than software and hardware. Other materials, humans, work practices, belong to the system as well. Moreover, systems cross unit or department boundaries. In the TQM-view, systems eliminate complexity rather than people. In TQM, culture is not dominated by power struggles. Rather, the organization takes advantage of the employees pride in craftsmanship. Human resources are regarded as a critical resource rather than a mere cost factor.
3.	Continuous improvement A traditional environment is reactive: improvement is triggered in case of a problem or the development of a new product. In TQM, quality is pursued proactively. Errors are not viewed as personal failures which require punishment, but as opportunities for learning. Performance is not evaluated in retrospect as either good or bad, but variation in performance is analyzed statistically to understand causes of poor performance. Authority is not imposed by position and rules, but is earned by communicating a vision.
TQM thus stresses improvement rather than conformance. CMM (see section 6.6) builds on TQM, and many of the requirements engineering techniques discussed in chapter 9 owe a tribute to TQM as well.
	6.4	The Quality System
ISO, the International Organization for Standardization, has developed ISO 9000, a series of standards for quality management systems. The series consists of three parts: ISO 9000:2000, ISO 9001:2000, and ISO 9004:2000. ISO 9000 gives fundamentals and vocabulary of the series of standards on quality systems. ISO 9001 integrates three earlier standards (labeled ISO 9001, ISO 9002 and ISO 9003). It specifies requirements for a quality system for any organization that needs to demonstrate its ability to deliver products that satisfy customer requirements. ISO 9004 contains guidelines for performance improvement. It is applicable after implementation of ISO 9001.
ISO 9001 is a generic standard. It can be applied to any product. A useful complement for software is ISO/IEC 90003:2004, containing guidelines for the application of ISO 9001 to computer software. It is a joint standard of ISO and IEC, the International Electrotechnical Committee. The scope of ISO/IEC 90003 is described as This International Standard specifies requirements for a quality management system where an organization
needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently provide a product that meets customer and applicable regulatory requirements, and
aims to enhance customer satisfaction through the effective application of the system, including processes for continual improvement of the system and the assurance of conformity to customer and applicable regulatory requirements.
The standard is very comprehensive. It uses five perspectives from which the management of quality in software engineering is addressed:
the systemic perspective, dealing with the establishment and documentation of the quality system itself. The quality system consists of a number of processes, such as those for software development, operation, and maintenance. These processes, and the quality system itself, have to be documented properly.
the management perspective, dealing with the definition and management of the policies to support quality. The quality management system itself has to be developed, implemented, and regularly reviewed. This perspective describes how this is done.
the resource perspective, dealing with the resources needed to implement and improve the quality management system, as well as to meet customer and regulatory requirements. The resources include both personnel, infrastructure, and work environment.
the product perspective, dealing with the processes to actually create quality products, such as those pertaining to requirements engineering, design, testing, production and servicing. This perspective makes up over 60% of the standard.
6.5. SOFTWARE QUALITY ASSURANCE
the improvement perspective, dealing with monitoring, measuring and analysis activities to maintain and improve quality.
Many organizations try, or have already tried, to obtain ISO 9000 registration. The time and cost this takes depends on how much the current process deviates from the ISO standards. If the current quality system is not already close to conforming, then ISO registration may take at least one year. ISO registration is granted when a thirdparty accredited body assesses the quality system and concludes that it does conform to the ISO standard. Reregistration is required every three years and surveillance audits are required every six months. ISO registration thus is a fairly drastic and costly affair, after which you certainly cannot lean back, but have to keep the organization alert.
Since software development projects have some rather peculiar characteristics (frequent changes in requirements during the development process, the rather invisible nature of the product during its development), there is a need for quality assurance procedures which are tailored towards software development. This is the topic of the next section.
6.5	Software Quality Assurance
The purpose of Software Quality Assurance (SQA) is to make sure that work gets done the way it is supposed to be done. More specifically, the goals of SQA (Humphrey, 1989) are:
to improve software quality by appropriately monitoring the software and its development process;
to ensure full compliance with the established standards and procedures for the software and the development process;
to ensure that any inadequacies in the product, the process, or the standards are brought to managements attention so these inadequacies can be fixed.
Note that the SQA people themselves are not responsible for producing quality products. Their job is to review and audit, and to provide the project and management with the results of these reviews and audits.
There are potential conflicts of interest between the SQA organization and the development organization. The development organization may be facing deadlines and may want to ship a product, while the SQA people have revealed serious quality problems and wish to defer shipment. In such cases, the opinion of the SQA organization should prevail. For SQA to be effective, certain prerequisites must be fulfilled:
It is essential that top management commitment is secured, so that suggestions made by the SQA organization can be enforced. If this is not the case, SQA soon	becomes	a	costly	padding	and	a	mere	nuisance	to	the	development organization;
The SQA organization should be independent from the development organization. Its reporting line should also be independent;
The SQA organization should be staffed with technically competent and judicious people. They need to cooperate with the development organization. If the two organizations operate as adversaries, SQA wont be effective. We must realize that, in the long run, the aims of the SQA organization and the development organization are the same: the production of high-quality products.
The review and audit activities and the standards and procedures that must be followed are described in the Software Quality Assurance Plan.
IEEE standard 730 offers a framework for the contents of a Quality Assurance Plan for software development (IEEE730, 1989). Figure 6.5 lists the entries of such a document. Appendix ?? contains a fuller description of its various constituents. IEEE standard 730 applies to the development and maintenance of critical software. For non-critical software, a subset of the requirements may be used.
IEEE standard 983 (IEEE983, 1986) is a useful complement to standard 730. IEEE Standard 983 offers further guidelines as to the contents of a quality assurance plan, the implementation of a quality assurance plan, and its evaluation and modification.
 
1.	Purpose
2.	Reference documents
3.	Management
4.	Documentation
5.	Standards, practices, conventions, and metrics
6.	Reviews and audits
7.	Test
8.	Problem reporting and corrective action
9.	Tools, techniques, and methodologies
10.	Code control
11.	Media control
12.	Supplier control
13.	Records collection, maintenance, and retention
14.	Training
15.	Risk management
 
	Figure 6.5	Main ingredients of IEEE Std 730
 
The Software Quality Assurance Plan describes how the quality of the software is to be assessed. Some quality factors can be determined objectively. Most factors at present can be determined only subjectively. Most often then, we will try to assess the quality by reading documents, by inspections, by walkthroughs and by peer reviews. In a number of cases, we may profitably employ tools during quality assurance, in particular, for static and dynamic analysis of program code. The actual techniques to be applied here will be discussed in the chapter on testing.
6.6	The Capability Maturity Model (CMM)
Consider the following course of events in a hypothetical software development project. Some organization is to develop a distributed library automation system. A centralized computer hosts both the software and the database. A number of local libraries are connected to the central machine through a web-based interface. The organization has some experience with library automation, albeit only with stand-alone systems.
In the course of the project, a number of problems manifest themselves. At first they seem to be disconnected and they do not alarm management. It turns out that the requirements analysis has not been all that thorough. Local requirements turn out to differ on some minor points. Though the first such deviations can be handled quite easily, keeping track of all change requests becomes a real problem after a while. When part of the system has been realized, the team starts to test the web-interface. The interface turns out to be too complex and time-consuming.
The project gets into a crisis eventually. Management has no proper means to handle the situation. It tries to cut back on both functionality and quality in a somewhat haphazard way. In the end, a rather unsatisfactory system is delivered two months late. During the subsequent maintenance phase, a number of problems are solved, but the system never becomes a real success.
Though the above description is hypothetical, it is not all that unrealistic. Many an organization has insufficient control over its software development process. If a project gets into trouble, it is usually discovered quite late and the organization has no other means but to react in a somewhat chaotic way. More often than not, speed is confused with progress.
An important step in trying to address these problems is to realize that the software development process can indeed be controlled, measured, and improved. In order to gauge the process of improving the software development process, Watts Humphrey developed a software maturity framework which has evolved into the Capability Maturity Model (CMM). This framework owes tribute to Total Quality Management (TQM), which in turn is based on principles of statistical quality control as formulated by Walter Shewart in the 1930s and further developed by W. Edwards Deming and Joseph Juran in the 1980s. Originally, there were separate CMM models for software engineering, systems engineering, and several others. These have now been integrated, and carry the label CMMI . The version described here is CMMI version 1.1 for software engineering and systems engineering (CMMI Product Team, 2002). CMM and CMMI were developed at the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) of Carnegie Mellon University.
In CMM (and CMMI), the software process is characterized into one of five maturity levels, evolutionary levels toward achieving a mature software process. To achieve a certain maturity level, a number of process areas must be in place. These process areas indicate important issues that have to be addressed in order to reach that level. Taken together, the process areas of a level achieve the set of goals for that level. Figure 6.6 lists the maturity levels and associated process areas of CMMI. CMMIs maturity levels can be characterized as follows:
Initial At the initial process level, the organization operates without formalized procedures, project plans, or cost estimates. Tools are not adequately integrated. Many problems are overlooked or forgotten, and maintenance poses real problems. Software development at this level can be characterized as being ad-hoc. Performance can be improved by instituting basic project management controls:
	Requirements management involves establishing and maintaining an agreement with the customer on the requirements of the system. Since requirements inevitably change, controlling and documenting these requirements is important.
	Project planning involves making plans for executing and managing the project. To be able to do any planning, an approved statement of work to be done is required. From this statement of work, estimates for the size of the project, resources needed, and schedule are determined, and risks to the project are identified. The results are documented in the project plan. This plan is used to manage the project; it is updated when necessary.
	Project monitoring and control is concerned with the visibility of actual progress. Intermediate results have to be reviewed and tracked with respect to the project plan. When necessary, the project plan has to be realigned with reality.
	Supplier agreement management. Where applicable, work done by suppliers has to be managed: plans for their part of the work have to be made, and progress of their part of the job has to be monitored.
	Measurement and analysis is concerned with making sure measurements are made and their results used. First, objectives for measurement and the way measures should be collected, stored and analyzed are established. Next, the collection, storage, and analysis of data must be implemented. Finally, the results are used for decision making, and corrective actions are taken where needed.
Level 5: Optimizing level
Organizational innovation and deployment Causal analysis and resolution
Level 4: Quantitatively managed level
Organizational process performance Quantitative project management
Level 3: Defined level
Requirements development
Technical solution
Product integration
Verification
Validation
Organization process focus
Organization process definition
Organizational training
Integrated project management
Risk management
Decision analysis and resolution
Level 2: Repeatable level
Requirements management Project planning
Project monitoring and control
Supplier agreement management
Measurement and analysis
Process and product quality assurance
Configuration management
Level 1: Initial level
	Figure 6.6	Maturity levels and associated process areas of CMMI
	Process and product quality assurance involves reviewing and auditing products and processes to validate that they comply with agreed upon standards and procedures.
	Configuration management is concerned with establishing and maintaining the integrity of all work items during the entire project life cycle. This involves identification of configuration items and baselines, and procedures to control changes to them.
Repeatable The main difference between the initial process level and the repeatable process level is that the repeatable level provides control over the way plans and commitments are established. Through prior experience in doing similar work, the organization has achieved control over costs, schedules, and change requests, and earlier successes can be repeated. The introduction of new tools, the development of a new type of product, and major organizational changes however still represent major risks at this level. The process areas needed to advance to the next level are aimed at standardizing the software process across the projects of the organization:
	Requirements development involves the production and analysis of requirements. Requirements have to be elicited, analyzed, validated, and communicated to appropriate stakeholders. Requirements development is not a one-shot activity. Rather, requirements are identified and refined throughout the whole life cycle.
	Technical solution is about design and implementation. Decisions concerning the architecture, custom development as opposed to an off the shelf solution, and modularization issues are typical ingredienst of this process area.
	Product integration concerns the assembling of a complete product out of its components. This can be one stage after all components have been developed, or it can proceed incrementally. An important element of product integration is the management of interfaces, to make sure that the components properly fit together.
	Verification is concerned with ensuring that the product meets its requirements. Peer reviews are an effective means for early defect detection and removal. Peer reviews, such as walkthroughs and inspections, are practices in which peers try to identify errors and areas where changes are needed.
	Validation is concerned with establishing that the product fulfills its intended use. As far as possible, validation activities should be done in the intended environment in which the product is going to be used.
	Organization process focus is concerned with organization process improvement. Measurements, lessons learned, project postmortems, product evaluation reports are typical sources of information to guide improvement activities. The responsibility for guiding and implementing these activities is typically assigned to a process group. In this way, improvement of the organizations process capabilities is made a responsibility of the organization as a whole, rather than the individual project manager.
	Organization process definition. The organization develops and maintains a set of software process assets, such as process elements, life cycle models, guidelines for tailoring a process model. Each project uses a process built out of these process assets.
	Organizational training. The purpose of the training program is to develop the necessary skills and knowledge of individuals to perform their roles. Training needs are identified at the level of the organization, project and individual. The fulfillment of these needs is addressed as well.
	Integrated project management involves developing a project-specific software process from the organizations set of standard processes, as well as the actual management of the project using the tailored process. Since the software processes of different projects have a common ancestor, projects may now share data and lessons learned.
	Risk management concerns the identification of potential problems, so that timely actions can be taken to mitigate adverse effects.
	Decision analysis and resolution is concerned with establishing guidelines as to which issues should be subjected to formal evaluation processes, and the application of those formal processes. The selection of COTS components and architectural reviews are example arease where formal evaluation processes might be applied.
Defined At the defined process level, a set of standard processes for the development and maintenance of software is in place. The organization has achieved a solid foundation, and may now start to examine their processes and decide how to improve them. Major steps to advance to the next level are:
	Organizational process performance, whose purpose is to establish and maintain a quantitative understanding of the performance of the set of standard processes. Individual projects are measured, and compared against expected results as documented in a baseline. The information is not only used to assess a project, but also to quantitatively manage it.
	Quantitative project management, which involves the setting of performance goals, measuring process performance, analyzing these measurements, and making the appropriate adjustments to the process in order to bring it in line with the defined limits. There is, therefore, an organization-wide measurement program and the results of it are used to continuously improve the process. An example process measure is the number of lines of code reviewed per hour.
Quantitatively managed At the quantitatively managed process level, quantitative data is gathered and analyzed on a routine basis. Everything is under control, and attention may therefore shift from being reactive -- what happens to the present project? -- to being proactive -- what can we do to improve future projects? The focus shifts to opportunities for continuous improvement:
	Organizational innovation and deployment is concerned with the identification and deployment of improvements. Technical improvements relate to new technologies and their orderly transition into the organization. Process improvements relate to the process in order to improve the quality of the products, the productivity of the software development organization, and reduction of the time needed to develop products.
	Causal analysis and resolution is concerned with identifying common causes of defects, and preventing them from recurring.
Optimizing At the final, optimizing, level, a stable base has been reached from which further improvements can be made. The step to the optimizing process level is a paradigm shift. Whereas attention at the other levels is focused on ways to improve the product, emphasis at the optimizing level has shifted from the product to the process. The data gathered can now be used to improve the software development process itself.
In 1989, Humphrey investigated the state of software engineering practice with respect to the CMM (Humphrey et al., 1989). Although this study concerned the DoD software community, there is little reason to expect that the situation was much rosier in another environment. According to his findings, software engineering practice at that time was largely at the initial level. There were a few organizations operating at the repeatable level, and a few projects operating at the defined level. No organization or project operated at the managed or optimizing levels.
In the ensuing years, a lot has happened. Many organizations have initiated a software process improvement program (SPI) to achieve a higher maturity level. Most of these improvement programs concern a move to the repeatable or defined level. The number of organizations at these levels has significantly increased since 1989. There are still few organizations or projects at the managed or optimizing level.
Reports from practical experience show that it takes about two years to move up a level. The cost ranges from $500 to $2000 per employee per year. The benefits, however, seem to easily outweigh the cost. Several companies have reported a return on investment of at least 5 to 1: every dollar invested in a process improvement program resulted in cost savings of at least $5.
To address the needs of small companies and small project teams, the Software Engineering Institute developed the Personal Software Process (PSP), a self-improvement process designed to help individuals to improve the way they work. Like the CMM, the PSP distinguishes between several maturity levels. The first step in PSP is to establish some basic measurements, such as development time and
 
6.7. SOME CRITICAL NOTES
defects found, using simple forms to collect these data. At the next level, these data are used to estimate time and quality. At still higher levels, the personal data are used to improve the individuals performance.
The basic principles of the CMM and the PSP are thus very similar: know thy process, measure thy performance, and base thy improvement actions on an analysis of the data gathered.
BOOTSTRAP and SPICE are two other CMM-like maturity models. BOOT-
STRAP uses a separate maturity rating for each of its practices. One of the interesting features of BOOTSTRAP is that all assessment results are collected in a database, thus allowing an organization to position itself by comparing its scores with those of similar organizations.
SPICE is an international initiative and has become an international standard (ISO/IEC 15504). SPICE stands for Software Process Improvement and Capability dEtermination. SPICE distinguishes different process categories, such as the management process, customer--supplier process and engineering process. The capability (maturity) level is determined for each process category and each process. Like BOOTSTRAP, SPICE thus results in a maturity profile. The SPICE methodology places heavy emphasis on the way process assessments are performed.
6.7	Some Critical Notes
Software development organizations exist to develop software rather than processes.
(Fayad, 1997)
The massive attention of organizations to obtaining CMM or ISO 9000 certification holds the danger that focus shifts from developing software to developing processes. A certified organization, however, does not guarantee the quality of the software developed under it. A mature development process is not a silver bullet. A framed certificate definitely is not.
The SEIs Capability Maturity Model seems most appropriate for the really big companies. It is doubtful whether small companies can afford the time and money required by a process improvement program as advocated by CMM. It is also doubtful whether they can afford to implement some of the process areas, such as the organization process focus process area, which requires the setting up an organization process group. Though the Personal Software Process may alleviate part of this criticism, the PSP does not have the same status as the CMM.
CMM is focused on discipline: structured work processes, strict plans, standardization. This fits bigger companies better than small ones. It also better fits activities that lend themselves to a strict approach, such as configuration management and testing. Requirements analysis and design ask for a certain amount of creativity, and a pure CMM approach may have a stifling effect here. The dichotomy noted in chapter 1 between factory-like and craft-like aspects of software engineering surfaces here as well.
CMMs original maturity levels constitute a rather crude five-point scale. If the assessment of a level 2 organization reveals that it fails the level 3 criteria on just one tiny issue, the verdict is rather harsh: the organization simply remains at level 2. This may not improve morale after two years of hard labor and significant investment. For one thing, this implication of maturity assessments places high demands on their reliability.
The rather crude assessment of organizations on a five-point scale may have other far-reaching consequences. The US government requires level 3 certification to qualify for contracts. Will this imply that level 1 and level 2 organizations are necessarily performing below standard? If level 3 certification is all that matters, is it worthwhile to aim for level 4 or 5?
CMMs original levels are like an instrument panel of an airplane with one gauge, which moreover can display only a few discrete values and thus provides the pilot with very little information. One may also envisage a software maturity instrument panel with many gauges, each of which shows a lot of detail. BOOTSTRAP and SPICE are frameworks that result in a maturity profile rather than a single score. The same holds for CMMI, which comes in two variants: a staged model which, like the original CMM, just has five levels of maturity, and a continuous model in which process improvement is done on a per process area basis.
	6.8	Getting Started
In the preceding sections we discussed various ways to review the quality of a software product and the associated development process. The development organization itself should actively pursue the production of quality products, by setting quality goals, assessing its own performance and taking actions to improve the development process.
This requires an understanding of possible inadequacies in the development process and possible causes thereof. Such an understanding is to be obtained through the collection of data on both the process and the resulting products, and a proper interpretation of those numbers. It is rather easy to collect massive amounts of data and apply various kinds of curve-fitting techniques to them. In order to be able to properly interpret the trends observed, they should be backed by sound hypotheses.
An, admittedly ridiculous, example is given in figure 6.7. The numbers in this table indicate that black cows produce more milk than white cows. A rather naive interpretation is that productivity can be improved significantly by repainting all the white cows.
Though the example itself is ridiculous, its counterpart in software engineering is not all that far-fetched. Many studies, for example, have tried to determine a relation between numbers indicating the complexity of software components and the quality of those components. Quite a few of those studies found a positive correlation between such complexity figures and, say, the number of defects found during testing. A straightforward interpretation of those findings then is to impose
6.8. GETTING STARTED
Color	Average production
White	10
Black	40
Figure 6.7 Hypothetical relation between the color of cows and the average milk production
some upperbound on the complexity allowed for each component. However, there may be good reasons for certain components having a high complexity. For instance, (Redmond and Ah-Chuen, 1990) studied complexity metrics of a large number of modules from the MINIX operating system. Some of these, such as a module that handles escape character sequences from the keyboard, were considered justifiably complex. Experts judged a further decomposition of these modules not justified. Putting a mere upperbound on the allowed value of certain complexity metrics is too simple an approach.
An organization has to discover its opportunities for process improvements. The preferred way to do so is to follow a stepwise, evolutionary approach in which the following steps can be identified:
1.	Formulate hypotheses
2.	Carefully select appropriate metrics
3.	Collect data
4.	Interpret those data
5.	Initiate actions for improvement
These steps are repeated, so that the effect of the actions is validated, and further hypotheses are formulated. By following this approach, the quest for quality will permeate your organization, which will subsequently reap the benefits.
One example of this approach is discussed in (van Genuchten, 1991). He describes an empirical study of reasons for delay in software development. The study covered six development projects from one department. Attention was focused on the collection of data relating to time and effort, viz. differences between plan and reality. A one-page data collection form was used for this purpose (see figure 6.8).
Some thirty reasons for delay were identified. These were classified into six categories after a discussion with the project leaders, and finalized after a pilot study. The reasons for delay were found to be specific to the environment.
A total of 160 activities were studied from mid 1988 to mid 1989. About 50% of the activities overran their plan by more than 10%. Comparison of planned
 
	Planned	Actual	Difference	Reason
Effort	---	---	---	---
Starting date	---	---	---	---
Ending date	---	---	---	---
Duration	---	---	---	---
 
	Figure 6.8	Time sheet for each activity
and actual figures showed that the relative differences increased towards the end of the projects. It was found that one prime reason for the difference between plan and reality was more time spent on other work than planned. The results were interpreted during a meeting with the project leaders and the department manager. The discussion confirmed and quantified some existing impressions. For some, the discussion provided new information. It showed that maintenance actions constantly interrupted development work. The meeting included a discussion on possible actions for improvement. It was decided to schedule maintenance as far as possible in maintenance weeks and include those in quarterly plans. Another analysis study was started to gain further insights into maintenance activities.
This study provides a number of useful insights, some of which reinforce statements made earlier:
The closed loop principle states that information systems should be designed such that those who provide input to the system are also main users of its output. Application of this principle results in feedback to the supplier of data, who is thereby forced to provide accurate input. It also prevents users from asking more than they need. In the above example, the data was both collected and analyzed by the project leaders. The outcome was reported back to those same project leaders and used as a starting point for further actions.
Local data collection should be for local use. Data collected may vary considerably between departments. Data is best used to gain insight in the performance of the department where the data is collected. Use in another department makes little sense.
The focus should be on continuous improvement. The data collection effort was aimed at locating perceived deficiencies in the software development process. It revealed causes for these deficiencies and provided an opportunity for improvement. The question is not one of who is right and who is wrong, but rather how can we prevent this from happening again in future projects.
The study did not involve massive data collection. Simple data sheets were used, together with unambiguous definitions of the meaning of the various
6.9. SUMMARY
metrics. The approach is incremental, whereby the study gives an opportunity for small improvements, and shows the way for the next study.
6.9	Summary
In this chapter, we paid ample attention to the notion of quality. Software quality does not come for free. It has to be actively pursued. The use of a well-defined model of the software development process and good analysis, design and implementation techniques are a prerequisite. However, quality must also be controlled and managed. To be able to do so, it has to be defined rigorously. This is not without problems, as we have seen in sections 6.2 and 6.3. There exist numerous taxonomies of quality attributes. For each of these attributes, we need a precise definition, together with a metric that can be used to state quality goals, and to check that these quality goals are indeed being satisfied. Most quality attributes relate to aspects that are primarily of interest to the software developers. These engineer-oriented quality views are difficult to reconcile with the user-oriented fitness for use aspects.
For most quality attributes, the relation between what is actually measured (module structure, defects encountered, etc.) and the attribute we are interested in is insufficiently supported by a sound hypothesis. For example, though programs with a large number of decisions are often complex, counterexamples exist which show that the number of decisions (essentially McCabes cyclomatic complexity) is not a good measure of program complexity. The issue of software metrics and the associated problems is further dealt with in chapter 12.
Major standards for quality systems have been defined by ISO and IEEE. These standards give detailed guidelines as regards the management of quality. Quality assurance by itself does not guarantee quality products. It has to be supplemented by a quality program within the development organization. Section 6.8 advocates an evolutionary approach to establishing a quality program. Such an approach allows us to gradually build up expertise in the use of quantitative data to find opportunities for process improvements.
We finally sketched the software maturity framework developed by the Software Engineering Institute. This framework offers a means to assess the state of software engineering practice, as well as a number of steps to improve the software development process. One of the major contributions of CMM and similar initiatives is their focus on continuous improvement. This line of thought has subsequently been successfully applied to other areas, resulting in, amongst others, a People-CMM, a Formal specifications-CMM, and a Measurement-CMM.
6.10	Further Reading
Fenton and Pfleeger (1996) provide a very thorough overview of the field of software metrics. The measurement framework discussed in section 6.1 is based on (Kitchenham et al., 1995). Kaner and Bond (2004) also gives a framework for evaluating metrics. (Software, 1997b) and (JSS, 1995) are special journal issues on software metrics. Many of the articles in these issues deal with the application of metrics in quality programs.
One of the first major publications on the topic of measurement programs is (Grady and Caswell, 1987). Success factors for measurement programs can be found in (Hall and Fenton, 1997) and (Gopal et al., 2002). Pfleeger (1995) elaborates on the relation between metrics programs and maturity levels. Niessink and van Vliet (1998b) give a CMM-like framework for the measurement capability of software organizations.
The best known taxonomies of software quality attributes are given in (McCall et al., 1977) and (Boehm et al., 1978). The ISO quality attributes are described in (ISO9126, 2001) and (Co te et al., 2006). Critical discussions of these schemes are given in (Kitchenham and Pfleeger, 1996) and (Fenton and Pfleeger, 1996). Suryn et al. (2004) gives an overview of ISO/IEC 90003.
Garvins quality definitions are given in (Garvin, 1984). Different kinds of benefit in a value-based definition of quality are discussed in (Simmons, 1996). For an elaborate discussion of Total Quality Management, see (Bounds et al., 1994) or (Ishikawa, 1985).
The Capability Maturity Model is based on the seminal work of Watts Humphrey (Humphrey, 1988, 1989). For a full description of the Capability Maturity Model Integrated, see (CMMI Product Team, 2002). Practical experiences with software process improvement programs are discussed in (Wohlwend and Rosenbaum, 1994), (Diaz and Sligo, 1997) and (Fitzgerald and OKane, 1999). Rainer and Hall (2003) discuss success factors, and Baddoo and Hall (2003) discuss de-motivators for SPI. A survey of benefits and costs of software process improvement programs is given in (Herbsleb et al., 1997) and (Gartner, 2001). High-maturity, CMM level 5 organizations are discussed in (Software, 2000).
The Personal Software Process (PSP) is described in (Humphrey, 1996) and (Humphrey, 1997a). BOOTSTRAP is described in (Kuvaja et al., 1994) and SPICE in (El Emam et al., 1997).
Criticisms of CMM-like approaches are found in (Fayad, 1997), (Fayad and Laitinen, 1997) and (Conradi and Fuggetta, 2002). El Emam and Madhavji (1995) discuss the reliability of process assessments.
Process improvement is the topic of several special journal issues; see (CACM, 1997), (Software, 1994). The journal Software Process: Improvement and Practice is wholly devoted to this topic.
Exercises
1.	Define the following terms: measurement, measure, metric.
2.	What is the difference between an internal and an external attribute?
6.10. FURTHER READING
3.	Define the term representation condition. Why is it important that a measure satisfies the representation condition?
4.	What is the main difference between an ordinal scale and an interval scale? And between an interval scale and a ratio scale?
5.	What are the main differences between the user-based and product-based definitions of quality?
6.	Which are the three categories of software quality factors distinguished by McCall?
7.	Discuss the transcendent view of software quality.
8.	Which of Garvins definitions of quality is mostly used by the software developer? And which one is mostly used by the user?
9.	Which quality viewpoint is stressed by ISO 9126?
10.	Discuss the cornerstones of Total Quality Management.
11.	What is the purpose of Software Quality Assurance?
12.	Why should the Software Quality Assurance organization be independent of the development organization?
13.	Why should project members get feedback on the use of quality data they submit to the Quality Assurance Group?
14.	Describe the maturity levels of the Capability Maturity Model.
15.	What is the major difference between level 2 and level 3 of the Capability Maturity Model?
16.	What is the difference between the staged and continuous versions of CMMI?
17.	Why is it important to quantify quality requirements?
18.	Consider a software development project you have been involved in. How was quality handled in this project? Were quality requirements defined at an early stage? Were these requirements defined such that they could be tested at a later stage?
19.	Define measurable properties of a software product that make up the quality criteria Modularity and Operability. Do these properties constitute an objective measure of these criteria? If not, in what ways is subjectivity introduced?
20.	Give a possible staffing for an SQA group, both for a small development organization (less than 25 people) and a large development organization (more than 100 people).
21.	Draw up a Quality Assurance Plan for a project you have been involved in.
22.	One quality requirement often stated is that the system should be userfriendly. Discuss possible differences between the developers point of view and the users point of view in defining this notion. Think of alternative ways to define system usability in measurable terms.
23.	Using the classification of the Capability Maturity Model, determine the maturity level that best fits your organization. Which steps would you propose to advance the organization to a higher maturity level? Are any actions being pursued to get from the current level to a more mature one?
24.	Write a critical essay on software maturity assessment, as exemplified by the Capability Maturity Model. The further reading section provides ample pointers to the literature on this topic.
25.	Discuss differences between SPI approaches for large and small companies (see also (Conradi and Fuggetta, 2002)).
26.	In 1988 and 1998, two surveys were conducted to assess the state of the art in software cost estimation in the Netherlands. One of the questions concerned the various stakeholders involved in developing a cost estimate. The resulting percentages were as follows:
It was concluded that the situation had improved. In 1998, the average number of parties involved had increased and this was felt to be a good sign. For each individual category, the percentage had gone up as well.
 
6.10. FURTHER READING	145
Can you think of a possibly negative conclusion from this same set of data, i.e. that the situation has become worse since 1988?
7
Cost Estimation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To appreciate the use of quantitative, objective approaches to software cost estimation
To have insight in the factors that affect software development productivity
To understand well-known techniques for estimating software cost and effort
To understand techniques for relating effort to development time
Software development takes time and money. When commissioning a building project, you expect a reliable estimate of the cost and development time up front. Getting reliable cost and schedule estimates for software development projects is still largely a dream. Software development cost is notoriously difficult to estimate reliably at an early stage. Since progress is difficult to see --just when is a piece of software 50% complete? --schedule slippages often go undetected for quite a while, and schedule overruns are the rule, rather than the exception. In this chapter, we look at various ways to estimate software cost and schedule.
When commissioning a house construction, decorating the bathroom, or layingout a garden, we expect a precise estimate of the costs to be incurred before the operation is started. A gardener is capable of giving a rough indication of the cost on the basis of, say, the area of land, the desired size of the terrace or grass area, whether or not a pond is required, and similar information. The estimate can be made more precise in further dialog, before the first bit of earth is turned. If you expect a similar accuracy as regards the cost estimate for a software development project, you are in for a surprise.
Estimating the cost of a software development project is a rather unexplored field, in which one all too often relies on mere guesstimates. There are exceptions to this procedure, fortunately. There now exist a number of algorithmic models that allow us to estimate total cost and development time of a software development project, based on estimates for a limited number of relevant cost drivers. Some of the important algorithmic cost estimation models are discussed in section 7.1.
In most cost estimation models, a simple relation between cost and effort is assumed. The effort may be measured in man-months, for instance, and each manmonth is taken to incur a fixed amount, say, of $5000. The total estimated cost is then obtained by simply multiplying the estimated number of man-months by this constant factor. In this chapter, we freely use the terms cost and effort as if they are synonymous.
The notion of total cost is usually taken to indicate the cost of the initial software development effort, i.e. the cost of the requirements engineering, design, implementation and testing phases. Thus, maintenance costs are not taken into account. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this notion of cost will also be used by us. In the same vein, development time will be taken to mean: the time between the start of the requirements engineering phase and the point in time when the software is delivered to the customer. Lastly, the notion of cost as it is used here, does not include possible hardware costs either. It concerns only personnel costs involved in software development.
Research in the area of cost estimation is far from crystallized. Different models use different measures and cost drivers, so that mutual comparisons are very difficult.
 
Suppose some model uses an equation of the form:
This equation shows a certain relation between effort needed ( ) and the size of the product ( Kilo Lines Of Code Lines Of Code ). The effort measure could be the number of man-months needed. Several questions come to mind immediately: What is a line of code? Do we count machine code, or the source code in some high-level language? Do we count comment lines, or blank lines that increase readability? Do we take into account holidays, sick-leave, and the like, in our notion of the man-month, or does it concern a net measure? Different interpretations of these notions may lead to widely different results. Unfortunately, different models do use different definitions of these notions. Sometimes, it is not even known which definitions were used in the derivation of the model.
To determine the equations of an algorithmic cost estimation model, we may follow several approaches. Firstly, we may base our equations on the results of experiments. In such an experiment, we in general vary one parameter, while the other parameters are kept constant. In this way, we may try to determine the influence of the parameter that is being varied. As a typical example, we may consider the question of whether or not comments help to build up our understanding of a program. Under careful control of the circumstances, we may pose a number of questions about one and the same program text to two groups of programmers. The first group gets program text without comments, the second group gets the same program text, with comments. We may check our hypothesis using the results of the two groups. The, probably realistic, assumption in this experiment is that a better and faster understanding of the program text has a positive effect on the maintainability of that program.
This type of laboratory experiment is often performed at universities, where students play the role of programmers. It is not self-evident that the results thus obtained also holds in industrial settings. In practice, there may be a rather complicated interaction between different relevant factors. Also, the subjects need not be representative. Finally, the generalization from laboratory experiments that are (of necessity) limited in size to big software development projects with which professionals are confronted is not possible. The general opinion is that results thus obtained have limited validity, and certainly need further testing.
A second way to arrive at algorithmic cost estimation models is based on an analysis of real project data, in combination with some theoretical underpinning. An organization may collect data about a number of software systems that have been developed. These data may concern the time spent on the various phases that are being distinguished, the qualifications of the personnel involved, the points in time at which errors occurred, both during testing and after installation, the complexity, reliability and other relevant project factors, the size of the resulting code, etc. Based on a sound hypothesis of the relations between the various entities involved and a (statistical) analysis of these data we may derive equations that numerically characterize these relations. An example of such a relation is the one given above, which relates to . The usability and reliability of such equations is obviously very much dependent upon the reliability of the data on which they are based. Also, the hypothesis that underlies the form of the equation must be sound.
The findings obtained in this way reflect an average, a best possible approximation based on available data. We therefore have to be very careful in applying the results obtained. If the software to be developed in the course of a new project cannot be compared with earlier products because of the degree of innovation involved, one is in for a big surprise. For example, estimating the cost of the Space Shuttle project cannot be done through a simple extrapolation from earlier projects. We may hope, however, that the average software development project has a higher predictability as regards effort needed and the corresponding cost.
The way in which we obtain quantitative relations implies further constraints on the use of these models. The model used is based on an analysis of data from earlier projects. Application of the model to new projects is possible only insofar as those new projects resemble old projects, i.e. the projects on whose data the model is based. If we have collected data on projects of a certain kind and within a particular organization, a model based on these data cannot be used without amendment for different projects in a possibly different organization. A model based on data about administrative projects in a government environment has little predictive value for the development of real-time software in the aerospace industry. This is one of the reasons why the models of, for example, Walston and Felix (1977) and Boehm (1981) (see section 7.1 for more detailed discussions of these models) yield such different results for one and the same problem description.
The lesson to be learned is that blind application of the formulae from existing models will not solve your cost estimation problem. Each model needs tuning to the environment in which it is going to be used. This implies the need to continuously collect your own project data, and to apply statistical techniques to calibrate model parameters.
Other reasons for the discrepancies between existing models are:
	Most models give a relation between man-months needed and size (in lines of code). As remarked before, widely different definitions of these notions are used.
	The notion effort does not always mean the same thing. Sometimes, one only counts the activities starting from the design, i.e. after the requirements specification has been fixed. Sometimes also, one includes maintenance effort.
Despite these discrepancies, the various cost estimation models do have a number of characteristics in common. These common characteristics reflect important factors that bear on development cost and effort. The increased understanding of software costs allows us to identify strategies for improving software productivity, the most important of which are:
Writing less code. System size is one of the main determinants of effort and cost. Techniques that try to reduce size, such as software reuse and the use of high-level languages, can obtain significant savings.
Getting the best from people. Individual and team capabilities have a large impact on productivity. The best people are usually a bargain. Better incentives, better work environments, training programs and the like provide further productivity improvement opportunities.
Avoiding rework. Studies have shown that a considerable effort is spent redoing earlier work. The application of prototyping or evolutionary development process models and the use of modern programming practices (information hiding) can yield considerable savings.
Developing and using integrated project support environments. Tools can help us eliminate steps or make steps more efficient.
In the next section, we discuss and compare some of the well-known algorithmic models for cost estimation. In many organizations, software cost is estimated by human experts, who use their expertise and gut feeling, rather than a formula, to arrive at a cost estimate. Some of the dos and donts of expert-based cost estimation are discussed in section 7.2.
Given an estimate of the size of a project, we will next be interested in the development time needed. With a naive view, we may conjecture that a project with an estimated effort of 100 man-months can be done in 1 year with a team of 8.5 people, but equally well in one month with a team of 100 people. This view is too naive. A project of a certain size corresponds to a certain nominal physical time period. If we try to shorten this nominal development time too much, we get into the impossible region and the chance of failure sharply increases. This phenomenon is further discussed in section 7.3.
The topics addressed in this chapter fit planning-driven development projects more than they do agile projects. In agile projects, iterations are usually fairly small, and do not warrant the effort required by the algorithmic models discussed in section 7.1. In agile projects (see chapter 3, increments correspond to one or a few user stories or scenarios. These user stories are estimated in terms of development weeks, bucks, or some artificial unit, say Points. Next, it is determined which user stories will be realized in the current increment, and development proceeds. Usually, the time box agreed upon is sacred, i.e., if some of the user stories cannot be realized within the agreed upon time frame, they are moved to a next iteration. Estimation accuracy is assumed to improve in the course of the project.
	7.1	Algorithmic Models
To be able to get reliable estimates, we need to extensively record historical data. These historical data can be used to produce estimates for new projects. In doing
 
so, we predict the expected cost on account of measurable properties of the project at hand. Just as the cost of laying out a garden might be a weighted combination of a number of relevant attributes (size of the garden, size of the grass area, yes/no for a pond), so we would like to estimate the cost of a software development project. In this section, we discuss efforts to get at algorithmic models to estimate software cost.
In the introduction to this chapter, we noticed that programming effort is strongly correlated with program size. There exist various (non-linear) models which express this correlation. A general form is
Here, again denotes the size of the software (lines of code/1000), while denotes the effort in man-months. , and are constants, and is a correction which depends on the values of the entities . In general, the base formula
is obtained through a regression analysis of available project data. Thus, the primary cost driver is software size, measured in lines of code. This nominal cost estimate is tuned by correcting it for a number of factors that influence productivity (so-called cost drivers). For instance, if one of the factors used is experience of the programming team, this could incur a correction to the nominal cost estimate of 1.50, 1.20, 1.00, 0.80 and 0.60 for a very low, low, average, high and very high level of expertise, respectively.
Figure 7.1 contains some of the well-known base formulae for the relation between software size and effort. For reasons mentioned before, it is difficult to compare these models. It is interesting to note, though, that the value of fluctuates around the value 1 in most models.
Origin	Base formula	See section
Halstead		12.1.4
Boehm		7.1.2
Walston--Felix		7.1.1
	Figure 7.1	Some base formulae for the relation between size and effort
This phenomenon is well known from the theory of economics. In a so-called economy of scale, one assumes that it is cheaper to produce large quantities of the same product. The fixed costs are then distributed over a larger number of units, which decreases the cost per unit. We thus realize an increasing return on investment. In the opposite case, we find a diseconomy of scale: after a certain point the production of additional units incurs extra costs.
In the case of software, the lines of code are the product. If we assume that producing a lot of code will cost less per line of code, formulae like those of Walston--Felix ( ) result. This may occur, for example, because the cost of expensive tools like program generators, programming environments and test tools can be distributed over a larger number of lines of code. Alternatively, we may reason that large software projects are more expensive, relatively speaking. There is a larger overhead because of the increased need for communication and management control, because of the problems and interfaces getting more complex, and so on. Thus, each additional line of code requires more effort. In such cases, we obtain formulae like those of Boehm and Halstead ( ).
There is no really convincing argument for either type of relation, though the latter ( ) may seem more plausible. Certainly for large projects, the effort required does seem to increase more than linearly with size.
	It is clear that the value of the exponent	strongly influences the computed value
, certainly for large values of . Figure 7.2 gives the values for , as they are computed for the earlier-mentioned models and some values for . The reader will notice large differences between the models. For small programs, Halsteads model yields the lowest cost estimates. For projects in the order of one million lines of code, this same model yields a cost estimate which is an order of magnitude higher than that of Walston--Felix.
 
 
1	0.7	2.4	5.2
10	22.1	26.9	42.3
50	247.5	145.9	182.8
100	700.0	302.1	343.6
1000	22135.9	3390.1	2792.6
 
	Figure 7.2	versus	for various base models
However, we should not immediately conclude that these models are useless. It is much more likely that there are big differences in the characteristics between the sets of projects on which the various models are based. Recall that the actual numbers used in those models result from an analysis of real project data. If these data reflect widely different project types or development environments, so will the models. We cannot simply copy those formulae. Each environment has its own specific characteristics and tuning the model parameters to the specific environment (a process called calibration) is necessary.
The most important problem with this type of model is to get a reliable estimate of the software size early on. How should we estimate the number of pages in a novel not yet written? Even if we know the number of characters, the number of locations and the time interval in which the story takes place, we should not expect a realistic size estimate up front. The further advanced we are with the project, the more accurate our size estimate will get. If the design is more or less finished, we may (possibly) form a reasonable impression of the size of the resulting software. Only if the system has been delivered, do we know the exact number.
The customer, however, needs a reliable cost estimate early on. In such a case, lines of code is a measure which is too inexact to act as a base for a cost estimate. We therefore have to look for an alternative. In section 7.1.4 we discuss a model based on quantities which are known at an earlier stage.
We may also switch to another model during the execution of a project, since we may expect to get more reliable data as the project is making progress. We then get a cascade of increasingly detailed cost estimation models. COCOMO 2 is an example of this; see section 7.1.5.
7.1.1	Walston--Felix
The base equation of Walston and Felix model (Walston and Felix, 1977) is
Some 60 projects from IBM were used in the derivation of this model. These projects differed widely in size and the software was written in a variety of programming languages. It therefore comes as no surprise that the model, applied to a subset of these 60 projects, yields unsatisfactory results.
In an effort to explain these wide-ranging results, Walston and Felix identified 29 variables that clearly influenced productivity. For each of these variables, three levels were distinguished: high, average and low. For a number of projects (51) Walston and Felix determined the level of each of these 29 variables, together with the productivity obtained (in terms of lines of code per man-month) in those projects. These results are given in figure 7.3 for some of the most important variables. Thus, the average productivity turned out to be 500 lines of code per man-month for projects with a user interface of low complexity. With a user interface of average or high complexity, the productivity is 295 and 124 lines of code per man-month, respectively. The last column contains the productivity change , the absolute value of the difference between the high and low scores.
According to Walston and Felix, a productivity index can now be determined for a new project, as follows:
Variable	Value of variable Average productivity (LOC)	(PC)
Complexity of user interface	normal 500	normal 295	normal 124	376
User participation during requirements specification	none 491	some 267	much 205	286
User-originated changes in design	few
297	--	many 196	101
User-experience with application area	none 318	some 340	much 206	112
Qualification, experience of personnel	low 132	average 257	high 410	278
Percentage programmers participating in design	25% 153	25 --50% 242	50% 391	238
Previous experience with operational computer	minimal 146	average 270	extensive 312	166
Previous experience with programming languages	minimal 122	average 225	extensive 385	263
Previous experience with application of similar or greater size and complexity	minimal 146	average 221	extensive 410	264
Ratio of average team size to duration (people/month)	0.5 305	0.5-0.9 310	0.9 171	134
Figure 7.3 Some productivity intervals (Source: C.E. Walston and C.P. Felix, A method for programming measurement and estimation, IBM Systems Journal, 1977.)
	The weights	are defined by
Here, is the productivity change of factor . For the first factor from figure 7.3 (complexity of the user interface), the following holds: , so . The variables can take on values , and , where the corresponding factor scores as low, average or high (and thus results in a high, average or low productivity, respectively). The productivity index obtained can be translated into an expected productivity (lines of code produced per man-month). Details of the latter are not given in (Walston and Felix, 1977).
The number of factors considered in this model is rather high (29 factors out of 51 projects). Also it is not clear to what extent the various factors influence each other. Finally, the number of alternatives per factor is only three, and does not seem to offer enough choice in practical situations.
Nevertheless, the approach taken by Walston and Felix and their list of cost drivers have played a very important role in directing later research in this area.
7.1.2	COCOMO
COCOMO (COnstructive COst MOdel) is one of the algorithmic cost estimation models best documented. In its simplest form, called Basic COCOMO, the formula that relates effort to software size, reads
Here, and are constants that depend on the kind of project that is being executed. COCOMO distinguishes three classes of project:
Organic A relatively small team develops software in a known environment. The people involved generally have a lot of experience with similar projects in their organization. They are thus able to contribute at an early stage, since there is no initial overhead. Projects of this type will seldom be very large projects.
Embedded The product will be embedded in an environment which is very inflexible and poses severe constraints. An example of this type of project might be air traffic control, or an embedded weapon system.
Semidetached This is an intermediate form. The team may show a mixture of experienced and inexperienced people, the project may be fairly large, though not excessively large, etc.
For the various classes, the parameters of Basic COCOMO take on the following values:
organic:	= 2.4,	= 1.05 semidetached:	= 3.0,	= 1.12 embedded:	= 3.6,	= 1.20
Figure 7.4 gives the estimated effort for projects of each of those three modes, for different values of (though an organic project of one million lines is not very realistic). Amongst others, we may read from this figure that the constant soon starts to have a major impact on the estimate obtained.
KLOC	organic		Effort in man-months semidetached		embedded
(		)	(		)	(	
1	2.4			3.0			3.6
10	26.9			39.6			57.1
50	145.9			239.4			392.9
100	302.1			521.3			904.2
1000	3390.0			6872.0			14333.0
Basic COCOMO yields a simple, and hence a crude, cost estimate based on a simple classification of projects into three classes. In his book Software Engineering )
	Figure 7.4	Size versus effort in Basic COCOMO
Economics, Boehm also discusses two other, more complicated, models, termed Intermediate COCOMO and Detailed COCOMO, respectively. Both these models take into account 15 cost drivers --attributes that affect productivity, and hence costs.
All these cost drivers yield a multiplicative correction factor to the nominal estimate of the effort. (Both these models also use values for which slightly differ from that of Basic COCOMO.) Suppose we found a nominal effort estimate of 40 man-months for a certain project. If the complexity of the resulting software is low, then the model tells us to correct this estimate by a factor of 0.85. A better estimate then would be 34 man-months. On the other hand, if the complexity is high, we get an estimate of man-months.
The nominal value of each cost driver in Intermediate COCOMO is 1.00 (see also figure 7.11. So we may say that Basic COCOMO is based on nominal values for each of the cost drivers.
On top of this set of cost drivers, the detailed model adds a further level of refinement. First of all, this model is phase-sensitive, the idea being that not all cost drivers influence each phase of the development cycle in the same way. So, rather than having one table with effort multipliers as in Intermediate COCOMO, Detailed COCOMO uses a set of such tables. These tables show, for each cost driver, a separate effort multiplier for each major development phase. Furthermore, Detailed COCOMO uses a hierarchy for the product to be developed, in which some cost drivers have an impact on the estimate at the module level, while others have an impact at the (sub)system level.
The COCOMO formulae are based on a combination of expert judgment, an analysis of available project data, other models, etc. The basic model does not yield very accurate results for the projects on which the model has been based. The intermediate version yields good results and, if one extra cost driver (volatility of the requirements specification) is added, it even yields very good results. Further validation of the COCOMO models using other project data is not straightforward,
 
Figure 7.5 The Rayleigh-curve for software schedules (Source: M.L. Shooman, Tutorial on software cost models, IEEE Catalog nr TH0067-9 (1979), 1979 IEEE.)
since the necessary information to determine the ratings of the various cost drivers is in general not available. So we are left with the possibility of only testing the basic model. Here, we obtain fairly large discrepancies between the effort estimated and the actual effort needed.
A major advantage of COCOMO is that we know all its details. A major update of the COCOMO model, better reflecting current and future software practices, is discussed in section 7.1.5.
7.1.3	Putnam
Norden studied the distribution of manpower over time in a number of software development projects in the 1960s. He found that this distribution often had a very characteristic shape which is well-approximated by a Rayleigh distribution. Based upon this finding, Putnam developed a cost estimation model in which the manpower required ( ) at time is given by
is a speed-up factor which determines the initial slope of the curve, while denotes the total manpower required, including the maintenance phase. equals the volume of the area delineated by the Rayleigh curve (see figure 7.5).
The shape of this curve can be explained theoretically as follows. Suppose a project consists of a number of problems for which a solution must be found. Let be the fraction of problems for which a solution has been found at time . Let be the problem-solving capacity at time . Progress at time then is proportional
to the product of the available problem-solving capacity and the fraction of problems yet unsolved. If the total amount of work to be done is set to 1, this yields:
d
 
d
After integration, we get
d
If we next assume that the problem-solving capacity is well approximated by an equation of the form , i.e. the problem-solving capacity shows a linear increase over time, the progress is given by a Rayleigh distribution:
d
 
d
Integration of the equation for that was given earlier yields the cumulative effort :
In particular, we get . If we denote the point in time at which the Rayleighcurve assumes its maximum value by , then . This point will be close to the point in time at which the software is being delivered to the customer. The volume of the area delineated by the Rayleigh curve between points 0 and then is a good approximation of the initial development effort. For this, we get
This result is remarkably close to the often-used rule of thumb: 40% of the total effort is spent on the actual development, while 60% is spent on maintenance.
Various studies indicate that Putnams model is well suited to estimating the cost of very large software development projects (projects that involve more than 15 man-years). The model seems to be less suitable for small projects.
A serious objection to Putnams model, in our opinion, concerns the relation it assumes between effort and development time if the schedule is compressed relative to the nominal schedule estimate: . Compressing a projects schedule in this model entails an extraordinary large penalty (see also section 7.3).
	7.1.4	Function Point Analysis
Function point analysis (FPA) is a method of estimating costs in which the problems associated with determining the expected amount of code are circumvented. FPA is based on counting the number of different data structures that are used. In the FPA method, it is assumed that the number of different data structures is a good size indicator. FPA is particularly suitable for projects aimed at realizing business applications for, in these applications, the structure of the data plays a very dominant role. The method is less suited to projects in which the structure of the data plays a less prominent role, and the emphasis is on algorithms (such as compilers and most real-time software).
The following five entities play a central role in the FPA-model:
Number of input types ( ). The input types refer only to user input that results in changes in data structures. It does not concern user input which is solely concerned with controlling the programs execution. Each input type that has a different format, or is treated differently, is counted. So, though the records of a master file and those of a mutation file may have the same format, they are still counted separately.
Number of output types ( ). For the output types, the same counting scheme is used.
Number of inquiry types ( ). Inquiry types concern input that controls the execution of the program and does not change internal data structures. Examples of inquiry types are: menu selection and query criteria.
Number of logical internal files ( ). This concerns internal data generated by the system, and used and maintained by the system, such as, for example, an index file.
Number of interfaces ( ). This concerns data that is output to another application, or is shared with some other application.
By trial and error, weights have been associated with each of these entities. The number of (unadjusted) function points, , is a weighted sum of these five entities:
With FPA too, a further refinement is possible, by applying corrections to reflect differences in complexity of the data types. In that case, the constants used in the above formula depend on the estimated complexity of the data type in question. Figure 7.6 gives the counting rules when three levels of complexity are distinguished. So, rather than having each input type count as four function points, we may count three, four or six function points, based on an assessment of the complexity of each input type.
Each input type has a number of data element types (attributes), and refers to zero or more other file types. The complexity of an input type increases as the number of its data element types or referenced file types increases. For input types, the mapping of these numbers to complexity levels is given in figure 7.7. For the other file types, these tables have the same format, with slightly different numbers along the axes.
Type		Simple	Complexity level Average	Complex
Input (	)		3	4	6
Output (	)		4	5	7
Inquiry (	)		3	4	6
Logical internal (	)	7	10	15
Interfaces (	)		5	7	10
	Figure 7.6	Counting rules for (unadjusted) function points
# of data elements
# of file types
	1 --4	5 --15	15
	0 or 1	simple	simple	average
2 --3 simple average complex 3 average complex complex
	Figure 7.7	Complexity levels for input types
As in other cost estimation models, the unadjusted function point measure is adjusted by taking into account a number of application characteristics that influence development effort. Figure 7.8 contains the 14 characteristics used in the FPA model. The degree of influence of each of these characteristics is valued on a six-point scale, ranging from zero (no influence, not present) to five (strong influence). The total degree of influence is the sum of the scores for all characteristics. This number is then converted to a technical complexity factor ( ) using the formula
	The (adjusted) function point measure	is now obtained through
Finally, there is a direct mapping from (adjusted) function points to lines of code. For instance, in (Albrecht, 1979) one function point corresponds to 65 lines of PL/I, or to 100 lines of COBOL, on average.
In FPA, it is not simple to decide exactly when two data types should be counted as separate. Also, the difference between, for example, input types, inquiry types, and
 
Data communications
Distributed functions
Performance
Heavily used configuration
Transaction rate
Online data entry
End-user efficiency
Online update
Complex processing
Re-usability
Installation ease
Operational ease Multiple sites
Facilitate change
 
	Figure 7.8	Application characteristics in FPA
interfaces remains somewhat vague. The International Function Point User Group (IFPUG) has published extensive guidelines on how to classify and count the various entities involved. This should overcome many of the difficulties that analysts have in counting function points in a uniform way.
Further problems with FPA have to do with its use of ordinal scales and the way complexity is handled. FPA distinguishes three levels of component complexity only. A component with 100 elements thus gets at most twice the number of function points of a component with one element. It has been suggested that a model which uses the raw complexity data, i.e. the number of data elements and file types referenced, might work as well as, or even better than, a model which uses an ordinal derivative thereof. In a sense, complexity is counted twice: both through the complexity level of the component and through one of the application characteristics. Yet it is felt that highly complex systems are not adequately dealt with, since FPA is predominantly concerned with counting externally visible inputs and outputs.
In applying the FPA cost estimation method, it still remains necessary to calibrate the various entities to your own environment. This holds the more for the corrections that reflect different application characteristics, and the transition from function points to lines of code.
7.1.5	COCOMO 2: Variations on a Theme
COCOMO 2 is a revision of the 1981 COCOMO model, tuned to the life cycle practices of the 1990s and 2000s. It reflects our cumulative experience with and knowledge of cost estimation. By comparing its constituents with those of previous cost estimation models, it also offers us a means to learn about significant changes in our trade over the past decades.
COCOMO 2 provides three increasingly detailed cost estimation models. These models can be used for different types of projects, as well as during different stages of a single project:
	the Application Composition model, mainly intended for prototyping efforts, for instance to resolve user interface issues (Its name suggests heavy use of existing components, presumably in the context of a powerful CASE environment.)
	the Early Design model, aimed at the architectural design stage
	the Post-Architecture model for the actual development stage of a software product
The Post-Architecture model can be considered an update of the original COCOMO model; the Early Design model is an FPA-like model; and the Application Composition model is based on counting system components of a large granularity, such as screens and reports.
The Application Composition model is based on counting Object Points. Object Points have nothing to do with objects as in object-oriented development. In this context, objects are screens, reports, and 3GL modules.
The roots of this type of model can be traced back to several variations on FPAtype size measures. Function points as used in FPA are intended to be a user-oriented measure of system function. The user functions measured are the inputs, outputs, inquiries, etc. We may conjecture that these user-functions are technology-dependent, and that FPA primarily reflects the batch-oriented world of the 1970s.
Present-day administrative systems are perhaps better characterized by their number of menus or screens. This line of thought has been pursued in various studies. Banker et al. (1991) compared Object Points with Function Points for a sample of software projects, and found that Object Points did almost as well as Function Points.
Object Points, however, are easier to determine, and at an earlier point in time. Total effort is estimated in the Application Composition model as follows:
1.	Estimate the number of screens, reports, and 3GL components in the application.
2.	Determine the complexity level of each screen and report (simple, medium or difficult). 3GL components are assumed to be always difficult. The complexity of a screen depends on the number of views and tables it contains. The complexity of a report depends on the number of sections and tables it contains. A classification table similar to those in FPA (see figure 7.9 for an example) is used to determine these complexity levels.
3.	Use the numbers given in figure 7.10 to determine the relative effort (in Object Points) to implement the object.
4.	The sum of the Object Points for the individual objects yields the number of Object Points for the whole system.
5.	Estimate the reuse percentage, resulting in the number of New Object Points
	(NOP) as follows:	.
6.	Determine a productivity rate man-month. This productivity rate depends on the experience and capability of both the developers and the maturity of the CASE environment they use. It varies from 4 (very low) to 50 (very high).
7.	Estimate the number of man-months needed for the project:	.
 
	Figure 7.9	Complexity levels for screens
 
	Figure 7.10	Counting Object Points
The Early Design model uses unadjusted function points (UFPs) as its basic size measure. These unadjusted function points are counted in the same way they are counted in FPA. Next, the unadjusted function points are converted to Source Lines Of Code (SLOC), using a ratio SLOC/UFP which depends on the programming language used. In a typical environment, each UFP may correspond to, say, 91 lines of Pascal, 128 lines of C, 29 lines of C++, or 320 lines of assembly language. Obviously, these numbers are environment-specific.
The Early Design model does not use the FPA scheme to account for application characteristics. Instead, it uses a set of seven cost drivers, which are a combination of the full set of cost drivers of the Post-Architecture model. The intermediate, reduced set of cost drivers is:
product reliability and complexity, which is a combination of the required software reliability, database size, product complexity and documentation needs cost drivers required reuse, which is equivalent to its Post-Architecture counterpart
platform difficulty, which combines execution time, main storage constraints, and platform volatility
personnel experience, which combines application, platform, and tool experience
personnel capability, which combines analyst and programmer capability and personnel continuity.
facilities, which is a combination of the use of software tools and multi-site development schedule, which again equals its Post-Architecture counterpart
These cost drivers are rated on a seven-point scale, ranging from extra low to extra high. The values assigned are similar to those in figure 7.11. Thus, the nominal values are always 1.00, and the values become larger or smaller as the cost driver is estimated to deviate further from the nominal rating. After the unadjusted function points have been converted to Kilo Source Lines Of Code ( ), the cumulative effect of the cost drivers is accounted for by the formula
cost driver
Finally, the Post-Architecture model is the most detailed model. Its basic effort equation is very similar to that of the original COCOMO model:
cost driver
It differs from the original COCOMO model in its set of cost drivers, the use of lines of code as its base measure, and the range of values of the exponent .
The differences between the COCOMO and COCOMO 2 set of cost drivers reflect major changes in the field. The set of COCOMO 2 cost drivers and the associated effort multipliers are given in figure 7.11. The values of the effort multipliers in this figure are the result of calibration on a certain set of projects. The changes are as follows:
Four new cost drivers have been introduced: required reusability, documentation needs, personnel continuity, and multi-site development. They reflect the growing influence of the corresponding aspects on development cost.
Two cost drivers have been dropped: computer turnaround time and use of modern programming practices. Nowadays, developers use workstations and (batch-processing) turnaround time is no longer an issue. Modern programming practices have evolved into the broader notion of mature software engineering practices, which are dealt with in the exponent of the COCOMO 2 effort equation.
The productivity influence, i.e. the ratio between the highest and lowest value, of some cost drivers has been increased (analyst capability, platform experience, language and tools experience) or decreased (programmer capability).
In COCOMO 2, the user may use both and as a base measure. It is also possible to use for part of the system. The counts are converted to counts as in the Early Design model, after which the effort equation applies.
Rather than having three modes, with slightly different values for the exponent in the effort equation, COCOMO 2 has a much more elaborate scaling model. This model uses five scale factors , each of which is rated on a six-point scale from very low (5) to extra high (0). The exponent for the effort equation is then determined by the formula:
So, can take on values in the range 1.01 to 1.26, thus giving a more flexible rating scheme than that used in the original COCOMO model. The scale factors used in COCOMO 2 are:
precedentedness, indicating the novelty of the project to the development organization. Aspects like the experience with similar systems, the need for innovative architectures and algorithms, and the concurrent development of hardware and software are reflected in this factor.
development flexibility, reflecting the need for conformance with pre-established and external interface requirements, and a possible premium on early completion.
architecture/risk resolution, which reflects the percentage of significant risks that have been eliminated. In many cases, this percentage will be correlated with the percentage of significant module interfaces specified, i.e. architectural choices made.
team cohesion, accounting for possible difficulties in stakeholder interactions. This factor reflects aspects like the consistency of stakeholder objectives and cultures, and the experience of the stakeholders in acting as a team.
process maturity, reflecting the maturity of the project organization according to the Capability Maturity Model (see section 6.6).
Only the first two of these factors were, in a crude form, accounted for in the original
COCOMO model.
The original COCOMO model allows us to handle reuse in the following way. The three main development phases, design, coding and integration, are estimated to take 40%, 30% and 30% of the average effort, respectively. Reuse can be catered for by separately considering the fractions of the system that require redesign ( ), recoding ( ) and re-integration ( ). An adjustment factor is then given by the formula
	An adjusted value	, given by
is next used in the COCOMO formulae, instead of the unadjusted value . In this way a lower cost estimate is obtained if part of the system is reused.
By treating reuse this way, it is assumed that developing reusable components does not require any extra effort. You may simply reap the benefits when part of a system can be reused from an earlier effort. This assumption does not seem to be very realistic. Reuse does not come for free (see also chapter ??).
COCOMO 2 uses a more elaborate scheme to handle reuse effects. This scheme reflects two additional factors that impact the cost of reuse: the quality of the code being reused and the amount of effort needed to test the applicability of the component to be reused.
If the software to be reused is strongly modular, strongly matches the application in which it is to be reused, and the code is well-organized and properly documented, then the extra effort needed to reuse this code is relatively low, and estimated to be 10%. This penalty may be as high as 50% if the software exhibits low coupling and cohesion, is poorly documented, and so on. This extra effort is denoted by the software understanding increment .
The degree of assessment and assimilation ( ) denotes the effort needed to determine whether a component is appropriate for the present application. It
 
			Rating		
Cost drivers	Very	Low	Nominal	High	Very	Extra
	low			high	high
 
Product factors						
Reliability required	0.75	0.88	1.00	1.15	1.39	
Database size		0.93	1.00	1.09	1.19	
Product complexity	0.75	0.88	1.00	1.15	1.30	1.66
Required reusability		0.91	1.00	1.14	1.29	1.49
Documentation needs
Platform factors	0.89	0.95	1.00	1.06	1.13	
Execution time constraints			1.00	1.11	1.31	1.67
Main storage constraints			1.00	1.06	1.21	1.57
Platform volatility
Personnel factors		0.87	1.00	1.15	1.30	
Analyst capability	1.50	1.22	1.00	0.83	0.67	
Programmer capability	1.37	1.16	1.00	0.87	0.74	
Application experience	1.22	1.10	1.00	0.89	0.81	
Platform experience	1.24	1.10	1.00	0.92	0.84	
Language and tool experience	1.25	1.12	1.00	0.88	0.81	
Personnel continuity
Project factors	1.24	1.10	1.00	0.92	0.84	
Use of software tools	1.24	1.12	1.00	0.86	0.72	
Multi-site development	1.25	1.10	1.00	0.92	0.84	0.78
Required development schedule	1.29	1.10	1.00	1.00	1.00	
 
Figure 7.11 Cost drivers and associated effort multipliers in COCOMO 2 (Source: B.W.
Boehm et al., COCOMO II Model Definition Manual, University of Southern California,
1997.)
ranges from 0% (no extra effort required) to 8% (extensive test, evaluation and documentation required).
Both these percentages are added to the adjustment factor , yielding the equivalent kilo number of new lines of code, :
	7.2	Guidelines for Estimating Cost
The models discussed in the preceeding section are based on data about past projects. One of the main problems in applying these models is the sheer lack of quantitative data about past projects. There simply is not enough data available. Though the importance of such a database is now widely recognized we still do not routinely collect data on current projects. It seems as if we cannot spare the time to collect data; we have to write software. DeMarco (1982) makes a comparison with the medieval barber who also acted as a physician. He could have made the same objection: We cannot afford the time to take our patients temperature, since we have to cut his hair.
We thus have to shift to other methods to estimate costs. These other methods are based on the expertise of the estimators. In doing so, certain traps have to be circumvented. It is particularly important to prevent political arguments from entering the arena. Typical lines of reasoning that reflect political reasoning are:
We were given 12 months to do the job, so it will take 12 months. This might be seen as a variation of Parkinsons Law: work fills the time available.
We know that our competitor put in a bid of $1M, so we need to schedule a bid of $0.9M. This is sometimes referred to as price to win.
We want to show our product at the trade show next year, so the software needs to be written and tested within the next nine months, though we realize that this is rather tight. This could be termed the budget method of cost estimation.
Actually, the project needs one year, but I cant sell that to my boss. We know that ten months is acceptable, so we settle for ten months.
Politically-colored estimates can have disastrous effects, as has been shown all too often during the short history of our field. Political arguments almost always play a role if estimates are being given by people directly involved in the project, such as the project manager, or someone reporting to the project manager. Very soon, then, estimates will influence, or be influenced by, the future assessment of those persons. To quote DeMarco (1982): one chief villain is the policy that estimates shall be used to create incentives.
Jrgensen (2005) gives the following guidelines for expert-based effort estimation:
	Do not mix estimation, planning, and bidding,
	Combine estimation methods,
	Ask for justification,
	Select experts with experience from similar projects,
	Accept and assess uncertainty,
 
7.2. GUIDELINES FOR ESTIMATING COST
	Provide learning opportunities, and
	Consider postponing or avoiding effort estimation.
The politically-colored estimation methods mentioned above all mix up estimation, planning and bidding. These have different goals, though. Estimations only goal is accuracy. Planning involves risk assessment and schedule. Bidding is about winning a contract. Though these activities have different goals, they are of course related. A low bid for instance generally incurs a tight schedule and higher risks.
An interesting experiment on the effects of bidding on the remainder of a project is described in (Jrgensen and Grimstad, 2004). In this experiment, the authors study what is called the winners curse, a phenomenon known from auctions, where players are uncertain of the value of a good when they bid. The highest bid wins, but the winner may be left with an item thats worth less than paid for. The term was first coined in the 1950s, when oil industries had no accurate way to estimate the value of their oil fields. In the software field, it has the following characteristics:
	Software providers differ in optimism in their estimates of most likely cost: some are over-optimistic, some are realistic, and some are pessimistic.
	Software providers with over-optimistic estimates tend to have the lowest bids.
	Software clients require a fixed-price contract.
	Software clients tend to select a provider with a low bid.
The result often is a Pyrrhic victory, a contract that results in low or negative profits to the bidder. But such a contract might also be risky for the client. Jrgensen and Grimstad (2004) describe an experiment in which they actually asked 35 companies for bids on a certain requirements specification. Next, four companies were asked to implement the system. They found that the companies with the lowest bids incurred the greatest risks.
Vacuuming a rug in two orthogonal directions is likely to pick up more dirt than vacuum that rug twice in the same direction. Likewise, the combination of sufficiently different estimation methods gives better estimates. So one may combine a COCOMO estimate with that of an expert, or estimates from experts with a different background. In this way, the bias that is inherent in a method or class of experts is mitigated.
Estimators should be held accountable for their estimates. Lederer and Prasad (2000) found that the use of estimates in performance evaluations of software managers and professionals is the only practice that leads to better estimates. In a slightly weaker form, one may at least ask for a justification of the estimate. Such a justification could refer to a calibrated model used, or a work breakdown structure in which cost estimates of components are derived from those in similar projects.
For lack of hard data, the cost of a software development project is often estimated through a comparison with earlier projects. If the estimator is very experienced, reasonable cost estimates may result. However, the learning effect of earlier experiences may lead to estimates that are too pessimistic in this case. We may expect that experience gained with a certain type of application leads to a higher productivity for subsequent projects. Similar applications thus give rise to lower costs.
(McClure, 1968) describes a situation in which a team was asked to develop a FORTRAN compiler for three different machines. The effort needed (in man-months) for these three projects is given in figure 7.12.
Compiler	Number of man-months needed
1	72
2	36
3	14
	Figure 7.12	Learning effect in writing a FORTRAN compiler
On the other hand, peculiar circumstances and particular characteristics of a specific project tend to get insufficient attention if cost is estimated through comparison with earlier projects. For example, a simple change of scale (automation of a local library with 25 000 volumes as opposed to a university library with over 1 000 000 volumes), slightly harsher performance requirements, a compressed schedule (which incurs a larger team and thus increases overhead because of communication) may have a significant impact on the effort required in terms of man-months.
Careless application of the comparison method of cost estimation leads to estimates like: the cost of this project is equal to the cost of the previous project.
We may also involve more than one expert in the estimation process. In doing so, each expert gives an estimate based on his own experience and expertise. Factors that are hard to quantify, such as personality characteristics and peculiar project characteristics, may thus be taken into account. Here too, the quality of the estimate cannot exceed the quality of the experts. The experts that participate in the estimate then should have experience in simliar projects. It does not help all that much to ask advice from an expert in office automation type systems to provide an estimate for an air-traffic control system.
Estimates incur uncertainty. A cost estimate of, say, 100 man months might mean that there is a 75% probability that the real cost of this project is between 80 and 120 manmonths. It is not a point estimate. One method that aims to get a more reliable estimate is to have the expert produce more than one estimate. We all have the tendency to conceive an optimistic estimate as being realistic. (Have you ever heard of a software system that got delivered ahead of time?) To obviate this tendency, we may employ a technique in which the expert is asked for three estimates: an
7.3. DISTRIBUTION OF MANPOWER OVER TIME
optimistic estimate , a realistic estimate , and a pessimistic estimate . Using a beta-distribution, the expected effort then is . Though this estimate will probably be better than the one simply based on the average of and , it seems justified to warn against too much optimism. Software has the tendency to grow, and projects have the tendency to far exceed the estimated effort.
Training improves performance. This holds for skaters as well as software cost estimators. Studies in other fields show that inexperienced people tend to overestimate their abilities and performance. There is no reason to expect the software field to be any different. The resulting cost and schedule overruns are all to common. Harrison (2004) suggests that a prime reason for more mature organizations to have fewer cost overruns is not so much higher productivity or better processes, but greater self-knowledge. I concur the same is true for people estimating software cost.
While executing a task, people have to make a number of decisions. These decisions are strongly influenced by requirements set or proposed. The cost estimate is one such requirement which will have an impact on the end result. We may imagine a hypothetical case in which model A estimates the cost at 300 man-months. Now suppose the project actually takes 400 man-months. If model B would have estimated the project at 450 man-months, is model B better than model A? It is quite possible that, starting from the estimate given by model B, the eventual cost would have been 600 man-months. The projects behavior is also influenced by the cost estimate. Choices made during the execution of a project are influenced by cost estimates derived earlier on. If a cost estimate is not needed, it is wise not making one either.
7.3	Distribution of Manpower over Time
Having obtained an estimate of the total number of man-months needed for a given project, we are still left with the question of how many calendar months it will take. For a project estimated at 20 man-months, the kind of schedules you might think of, include:
	20 people work on the project for 1 month;
	4 people work on the project for 5 months;
	1 person works on the project for 20 months.
These are not realistic schedules. We noticed earlier that the manpower needed is not evenly distributed over the time period of the project. From the shape of the Rayleigh curve we find that we need a slowly increasing manpower during the development stages of the project.
Cost estimation models generally provide us with an estimate of the development time (schedule) as well. Contrary to the effort equations, the various models show a remarkable consistency when it comes to estimating the development time, as is shown in figure 7.13.
 
Walston--Felix
COCOMO (organic)
COCOMO 2 (nominal schedule)
Putnam
 
	Figure 7.13	Relation between development time and effort
The values thus computed represent nominal development times. It is worthwhile studying ways to shorten these nominal schedules. Obviously, shortening the development time means an increase in the number of people involved in the project.
In terms of the Rayleigh curve model, shortening the development time amounts to an increase of the value , the speed-up factor which determines the initial slope of the curve. The peak of the Rayleigh curve then shifts to the left and at the same time it shifts up. We thus get a faster increase of manpower required at the start of the project and a higher maximum workforce.
Such a shift does not go unpunished. Different studies show that individual productivity decreases as team size grows. There are two major causes of this phenomenon:
As the team gets larger, the communication overhead increases, since more time will be needed for consultation with other team members, tuning of tasks, and the like.
If manpower is added to a team during the execution of a project, the total team productivity decreases at first. New team members are not productive right from the start. At the same time, they require time from the other team members during their learning process. Taken together, this causes a decrease in total productivity.
The combination of these two observations leads to the phenomenon that has become known as Brooks Law: Adding manpower to a late project only makes it later.
By analyzing a large amount of project data, Conte et al. found the following relation between average productivity (measured in lines of code per man-month) and average team size (Conte et al., 1986):
In other words, individual productivity decreases exponentially with team size.
A theoretical underpinning hereof can be given on account of Brooks observation regarding the number of communication links between the people involved in a project. This number is determined by the size and structure of the team. If, in a team of size , each member has to coordinate his activities with those of all
7.4. SUMMARY
other members, the number of communication links is . If each member needs to communicate with one other member only, this number is . Less communication than that seems unreasonable, since we would then have essentially independent teams. (If we draw team members as nodes of a graph and communication links as edges, we expect the graph to be connected.)
	The number of communication links thus varies from roughly	to roughly	.
In	a true	hierarchical organization,	this leads to	communication	paths,	with
.
For an individual team member, the number of communication links varies from 1 to . If the maximum individual productivity is and each communication link results in a productivity loss , the average productivity is
where , with , is a measure of the number of communication links. (We assume that there is at least one person who communicates with more than one other person, so .) For a team of size , this leads to a total productivity
For a given set of values for , and , this is a function which, for increasing values of , goes from 0 to some maximum and then decreases again. There thus is a certain optimum team size that leads to a maximum team productivity. The team productivity for different values of the is given in figure 7.14. Here, we assume that individual productivity is 500 man-month ( ), and the productivity loss is 10% per communication link ( ). With full interaction between team members ( ) this results in an optimum team size of 5.5 persons.
Everything takes time. We can not shorten a software development project indefinitely by exchanging time against people. Boehm sets the limit at 75% of the nominal development time, on empirical grounds. A system that has to be delivered too fast, gets into the impossible region. The chance of success becomes almost nil if the schedule is pressed too far. See also figure 7.15.
In any case, a shorter development time induces higher costs. We may use the following rule of thumb: compressing the development time by X% results in a cost increase of X% relative to the nominal cost estimate (Boehm, 1984a).
7.4	Summary
It remains to be seen whether we will ever get one, general, cost estimation model. The number of parameters that impact productivity simply seems to be too large. Yet, each organization may develop a model which is well suited for projects to be undertaken within that organization. An organization may, and should, build a database with data on its own projects. Starting with a model like COCOMO 2, the different parameters, i.e. applicable cost drivers and values for the associated
Team size	Individual productivity	Total productivity
1	500	500
2	450	900
3	400	1200
4	350	1400
5	300	1500
5.5	275	1512
6	250	1500
7	200	1400
8	150	1200
	Figure 7.14	Impact of team size on productivity
effort multipliers, may then be determined. In the course of time, the model becomes more closely tuned to the organizational environment, resulting in better and better estimates. Reifer (2000) for example describes how COCOMO II can be adapted to estimate Web-based software development projects.
Though we advocate the use of algorithmic cost estimation models, a word of caution should be made. Present-day models of this kind are not all that good yet. At best, they yield estimates which are at most 25% off, 75% of the time, for projects used to derive the model. For the time being, expert-based cost estimates are a viable alternative.
Even when a much better performance is realized, some problems remain when using the type of cost estimation model obtained in this way:
Even though a model like COCOMO 2 looks objective, a fair amount of subjectivity is introduced through the need to assign values to the various levels of a number of cost drivers. Based on an analysis of historical project data, (Jones, 1986) lists 20 factors which certainly influence productivity, and another 25 for which it is probable. The set of COCOMO 2 cost drivers already allows for a variation of 1:800. A much smaller number of relevant cost drivers would reduce a models vulnerability to the subjective assessment of project characteristics.
The models are based on data from old projects and reflect the technology of those projects. In some cases, the project data are even fairly old. The impact of more recent developments cannot easily be taken into account, since we do not have sufficient data on projects which exhibit those characteristics.
Almost all models take into account attributes that impact the initial development of software. Attributes which specifically relate to maintenance activities
7.4. SUMMARY
 
Figure 7.15 The impossible region (Source: B.W. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics, fig. 27-8/page 471, 1981, Reprinted by permission of Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs,
NJ)
are seldom taken into account. Also, factors like the amount of documentation required, the number of business trips (in case of multisite development) are often lacking. Yet, these factors may have a significant impact on the effort needed.
Algorithmic models usually result from applying statistical techniques like regression analysis to a given set of project data. For a new project, the parameters of the model have to be determined, and the model yields an estimate and, in some cases, a confidence interval.
A problem of a rather different nature is the following: In the introduction to this chapter we compared software cost estimation with cost estimation for laying out a garden. When laying out a garden, we often follow a rather different line of thought, namely: given a budget of, say, $10 000, what possibilities are there? What happens if we trade off a pond against something else?
Something similar is also possible with software. Given a budget of $100 000 for library automation, what possibilities are there? Which user interface can we expect, what will the transaction speed be, how reliable will the system be? To be able to answer this type of question, we need to be able to analyze the sensitivity of an estimate to varying values of relevant attributes. Given the uncertainty about which attributes are relevant to start with, this trade-off problem is still largely unsolved.
Finally, estimating the cost of a software development project is a highly dynamic activity. Not only may we switch from one model to another during the course of a project, estimates will also be adjusted on the basis of experiences gained. Switching to another model during the execution of a project is possible, since we may expect to get more reliable data while the project is making progress. We may, for instance, imagine using the series of increasingly detailed COCOMO 2 models.
We cannot, and should not, rely on a one-shot statistical cost estimate. Controlling a software development project implies a regular check of progress, a regular check of estimates made, re-establishing priorities and weighing stakes, as the project is going on.
	7.5	Further Reading
Early cost estimation models are described in (Nelson, 1966) and (Wolverton, 1974). The Walston--Felix model is described in (Walston and Felix, 1977). The model of Putnam and Norden is described in (Norden, 1970), (Putnam, 1978). (Boehm, 1981) is the definitive source on the original COCOMO model. COCOMO 2 is described in (Boehm et al., 1995) and (Boehm et al., 1997).
Function point analysis (FPA) is developed by Albrecht (Albrecht, 1979; Albrecht and Gaffney, 1983). Critical appraisals of FPA can be found in (Symons, 1988), (Kemerer, 1993), (Kemerer and Porter, 1992), (Abran and Robillard, 1992) and (Abran and Robillard, 1996). A detailed discussion of function points, its counting process and some case studies, is provided by (Garmus and Herron, 1996).
The relation between project behavior and its cost estimate is discussed in (Abdel-Hamid et al., 1993). Guidelines for cost estimation are given in (Boehm and Sullivan, 1999), (Fairley, 2002) and (Jrgensen, 2005). (Software, 2000) is a special issue devoted to software estimation.
Exercises
1.	In which ways may political arguments influence cost estimates?
2.	What does the Walston--Felix model look like?
3.	How may the Rayleigh-curve be related to software cost estimation?
7.5. FURTHER READING
4.	Give a sketch of Function Point Analysis (FPA).
5.	Give a sketch of COCOMO 2.
6.	Discuss the major differences between COCOMO 2 and FPA.
7.	Give a rationale for Brooks Law.
8.	In which sense does Function Point Analysis (FPA) reflect the batch-oriented world of the 1970s?
9.	How	may	early	cost	estimates	influence	the	way	in	which	a	project	is executed?
10.	Why is it difficult to compare different cost estimation models?
11.	Suppose you are involved in a project which is estimated to take 100 manmonths. How would you estimate the nominal calendar time required for this project? Suppose the project is to be finished within six calendar months. Do you think such a schedule compression is feasible?
12.	Why should software cost models be recalibrated from time to time?
13.	How would you calibrate the COCOMO 2 model to fit software development in your organization?
14.	Suppose you are managing a project which is getting behind schedule. Possible actions include: renegotiating the time schedule, adding people to the project, and renegotiating quality requirements. In which ways can these actions shorten the time schedule? Can you think of other ways to finish the project on time?
15.	Suppose you have a LOC-based cost estimation model available whose parameters are based on projects from your own organization that used COBOL as the implementation language. Can you use this model to estimate the cost of a project whose implementation language is Pascal? What if the model is based on projects that used C?
16.	Can you give an intuitive rationale for the values of the COCOMO 2 cost drivers (figure 7.11) that relate to project attributes?
 
8
Project Planning and Control
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To appreciate looking at project control from a system point of view
To be aware of typical project situations, and ways in which projects can be successfully dealt with in such situations
To understand how risks can be prevented from becoming problems
To know techniques for the day-to-day planning and control of software development projects
8.1. A SYSTEMS VIEW OF PROJECT CONTROL
In this chapter I try to reconcile the various approaches sketched in chapters 3--7. A taxonomy of software development projects is given, together with recommended management practices for dealing with such projects. The chapter also deals with risk management and some well-known techniques for project planning and control.
Software development projects differ widely. These differences are reflected in the ways in which these projects are organized and managed. For some projects, the budget is fixed and the goal of the project is to maximize the quality of the end product. For others, quality constraints are fixed in advance, and the goal is to produce effectively a system that meets those quality constraints. If the developing organization has considerable experience with the application domain and the requirements are fixed and stable, a tightly structured approach may yield a satisfactory solution. In applications with fuzzy requirements and little previous experience in the development team, a more agile approach may be desirable.
It is important to identify those project characteristics early on, because they will influence the way a project is organized, planned and controlled. In section 8.1, we will discuss project control from a systems point of view. This allows us to identify the major dimensions along which software development projects differ. These dimensions lead to a taxonomy of software development projects, which will be discussed in section 8.2. For each of the project categories distinguished, we will indicate how best to control the various entities identified in previous chapters. This type of assessment is to be done at the project planning stage.
This assessment links global risk categories to preferred control situations. Daily practice, however, is more complex. An actual project faces many risks, each of which has to be handled in turn. Even risks for which we hoped to have found an adequate solution, may turn into problems later on. Risk factors therefore have to be monitored, and contingency plans have to be developed. The early identification of risks and the development and carrying out of strategies to mitigate these risks is known as risk management. Risk management is discussed in section 8.3.
Software development projects consist of a number of interrelated tasks. Some of these will have to be handled sequentially (a module cannot be tested until it has been implemented), while others may be handled in parallel (different modules can be implemented concurrently). The dependencies between tasks can be depicted in a network from which a project schedule can be derived. These and similar tools for the micro-level planning and control of software development projects are discussed in section 8.4.
8.1	A Systems View of Project Control
In the preceding chapters, we discussed several entities that need to be controlled. During the execution of a software development project, each of these entities needs to be monitored and assessed. From time to time, adjustments will have to be made. To be able to do so, we must know which entities can be varied, how they can be varied, and what the effect of adjustments is.
To this end, we will consider project control from a systems point of view. We now consider the software development project itself as a system. Project control may then be described in terms of:
	the system to be controlled, i.e. the software development project;
	the entity that controls the system, i.e. the project manager, his organization and the decision rules he uses;
	information which is used to guide the decision process. This information may come from two sources. It may either come from the system being controlled (such as a notice of technical problems with a certain component) or it may have a source outside the system (such as a request to shorten development time).
The variables that play a role in controlling a system may be categorized into three classes: irregular variables, goal variables, and control variables.
Irregular variables are those variables that are input to the system being controlled. Irregular variables cannot be varied by the entity that controls the system. Their values are determined by the systems environment. Examples of irregular variables are the computer experience of the user or the project staffing level.
An important precondition for effective control is knowledge of the projects goals. In developing software, various conflicting goals can be distinguished. One possible goal is to minimize development time. Since time is often pressing, this goal is not unusual. Another goal might be to maximize efficiency, i.e. development should be done as cheaply as possible. Optimal use of resources (mostly manpower) is then needed. Yet a third possible goal is to maximize quality. Each of these goals is possible, but they can be achieved only if it is known which goals are being pursued. These goals collectively make up the set of goal variables.
Finally, the decision process is guided by the set of control variables. Control variables are entities which can be manipulated by the project manager in order to achieve the goals set forth. Examples of possible control variables are the tools to be used, project organization, efficiency of the resulting software.
It is not possible to make a rigid separation between the various sets of variables. It depends on the situation at hand whether a particular variable should be taken as an irregular variable, goal variable, or control variable. If the requirements are stable and fixed, one may for instance try to control the project by employing adequate personnel and using a proper set of tools. For another project, manpower may be fixed and one may try to control the project by extending the delivery date, relaxing quality constraints, etc.
However, in order to be able to control a project, the different sets of variables must be known. It must be known where control is, and is not, possible. This is only
 
one prerequisite, though. In systems theory, the following conditions for effective control of a system are used:
	the controlling entity must know the goals of the system;
	the controlling entity must have sufficient control variety;
	the controlling entity must have information on the state, input and output of the system;
	the controlling entity must have a conceptual control model. It must know how and to what extent the different variables depend on and influence each other.
When all these conditions are met, control can be rational, in which case there is no uncertainty, since the controlling entity is completely informed about every relevant aspect. The control problem can then be structured and formalized. Daily practice of software development is different, though. There is insufficient room for control or the effect of control actions is not known. Control then becomes much more intuitive or primitive. It is based on intuition, experience, and rules of thumb.
The degree to which a software development project can be controlled increases as the control variety increases. This control variety is determined by the number of control variables and the degree to which they can be varied. As noticed before, the control variety is project dependent.
Controlling software development means that we must be able to measure both the project and the product. Measuring a project means that we must we able to assess progress. Measuring a product means that we must be able to determine the degree to which quality and functional requirements are being met.
Controlling software development projects implies that effective control actions are possible. Corrective actions may be required if progress is not sufficient or the software does not comply with its requirements. Effective control means that we know what the effect of control actions is. If progress is insufficient and we decide to allocate extra manpower, we must understand the impact of this extra manpower on the time schedule. If the quality of a certain component is less than required and we decide to allocate extra test time, we must know how much test time is required in order to achieve the desired quality.
In practice, controlling a software development project is not a rational process. The ideal systems theory situation is not met. There are a number of uncertainties which make managing such projects a challenging activity. Below, we will discuss a few idealized situations, based on the uncertainty of various relevant aspects.
8.2	A Taxonomy of Software Development Projects
In the preceding section, we identified several conditions that need to be satisfied in order to be able to control projects rationally. Since these conditions are often not met, we will have to rely on a different control mechanism in most cases. The control mechanism best suited to any given situation obviously depends on relevant characteristics of the project at hand.
Based on an analysis of software development project characteristics that are important for project control, we will distinguish several project situations, and indicate how projects can successfully be controlled in these situations.
We will group project characteristics into three classes: product characteristics, process characteristics, and resource characteristics. From the point of view of project control, we are interested in the degree of certainty of those characteristics. For example, if we have clear and stable user requirements, product certainty is high. If part of the problem is to identify user requirements, or the user requirements frequently change during the development project, product certainty is low.
If product certainty is high, control can be quite rational, insofar as it depends on product characteristics. Since we know what the product is supposed to accomplish, we may check compliance with the requirements and execute corrective actions if needed. If product certainty is low, this is not feasible. We either do not know what we are aiming at, or the target is constantly moving. It is only reasonable to expect that control will be different in those cases.
For the present discussion, we are interested only in project characteristics that may differ between projects. Characteristics common to most or all of software development projects, such as the fact that they involve teamwork, will not lead to different control paradigms.
We will furthermore combine the characteristics from each of the three categories identified above, into one metric, the certainty of the corresponding category. This leaves us with three dimensions along which software development projects may differ:
Product certainty Product certainty is largely determined by two factors: whether or not user requirements are clearly specified, as regards both functionality and quality, and the volatility of those user requirements. Other product characteristics are felt to have a lesser impact on our understanding of what the end-product should accomplish.
Process certainty The degree of (development) process certainty is determined by such factors as: the possibility of redirecting the development process, the degree to which the process can be measured and the knowledge we have about the effect of control actions, and the degree to which new, unknown tools are being used.
Resource certainty The major determinant here is the availability of the appropriate qualified personnel.
If we allow each of these certainty factors to take one of two values (high and low), we get eight control situations, although some of them are not very realistic. If we have little or no certainty about the software to be developed, we can hardly expect to be certain about the process to be followed and the resources needed to accomplish our goals. Similarly, if we do not know how to carry out the development process, we also do not know which resources are needed.
This leaves us with four archetypal situations, as depicted in figure 8.1. Below, we will discuss each of these control situations in turn. In doing so, we will pay attention to the following aspects of those control situations:
	the kind of control problem;
	the primary goals to be set in controlling the project;
	the coordination mechanism to be used;
	the development strategy, or process model, to be applied; 	the way and degree to which cost can be estimated.
	Realization	Allocation	Design	Exploration
Product certainty	high	high	high	low
Process certainty	high	high	low	low
Resource certainty	high	low	low	low
	Figure 8.1	Four archetypal control situations
Realization problem If the requirements are known and stable, it is known how the software is to be developed, there is sufficient control variety, the effect of control actions is known, and sufficient resources are available, we find ourselves in an ideal situation, a situation not often encountered in our field. The main emphasis will be on realization: how can we, given the requirements, achieve our goal in the most effective way? As for the development strategy, we may use some linear process model. Feedback to earlier phases, as in the waterfall model, is needed only for verification and validation activities.
To coordinate activities in a project of this type, we may use direct supervision. Work output can be standardized, since the end result is known. Similarly, the work processes and worker skills can be fixed in advance. There will thus be little need for control variety as far as these variables are concerned.
Management can be done effectively through a separation style. The work to be done is fixed through rules and procedures. Management can allocate tasks and check their proper execution.
As for cost estimation, we may successfully use one of the more formalized cost models. Alternatively, experts in the domain may give a reliable estimate. A cost estimation thus obtained can be used to guard the projects progress and yields a target to be achieved.
Allocation problem This situation differs from the previous one in that there is uncertainty as regards the resources. The major problem then becomes one of the availability of personnel. Controlling a project of this kind tends to become one of controlling capacity. The crucial questions become: How do we get the project staffed? How do we achieve the desired end-product with limited means?
According to Mintzberg, one has to try to standardize the process as far as possible in this case. This makes it easier to move personnel between tasks. Guidelines and procedures may be used to describe how the various tasks have to be carried out.
As regards the development strategy, we may again opt for the waterfall model. We may either contract out the work to be done, or try to acquire the right type and amount of qualified personnel.
As for cost estimation, either some cost estimation model or expert estimates can be used. Since there is uncertainty as regards resources, there is a need for sensitivity analyses in order to gain insight into such questions as: What will happen to the total cost and development time if we allocate three designers of level A rather than four designers of level B?
Design problem If the requirements are fixed and stable, but we do not know how to carry out the process, nor which resources to employ, the problem is one of design. Note that the adjective design refers to the design of the project, not the design of the software. We have to answer such questions as: which milestones are to be identified, which documents must be delivered and when, what personnel must be allocated, how will responsibilities be assigned?
In this situation, we have insufficient knowledge of the effect of allocating extra personnel, other tools, different methods and techniques. The main problem then becomes one of controlling the development process.
In Mintzbergs classification, this can best be pursued through standardization of work outputs. Since the output is fixed, control should be done through the process and the resources. The effect of such control actions is not sufficiently known, however.
In order to make a project of this kind manageable, one needs overcapacity. As far as the process is concerned, this necessitates margins in development time and budget. Keeping extra personnel is not feasible, in general.
In these situations, we will need frequently to measure progress towards the projects goals in order to allow for timely adjustments. Therefore, we may want to go from a linear development model to an incremental one. This preference will increase as the uncertainty increases.
Cost estimation will have to rely on past experience. We will usually not have enough data to use one of the more formalized cost estimation models. In this situation too, we will need sensitivity analyses. This need will be more pressing than in the previous situation, since the uncertainty is greater. The project manager will be interested in the sensitivity of cost estimates to certain cost drivers. He might be interested in such questions as: what will happen to the development schedule if two extra analysts are assigned to this project, or:
what will the effect be on the total cost if we shorten the development time by days? By viewing cost estimation in this way, the manager will gain insight
to, and increase his feeling for, possible solution strategies.
Exploration problem If the product certainty, process certainty and resource certainty are all low, we get the most difficult control situation.
Because of these uncertainties, the work will be exploratory in nature. This situation does not fit a coordination mechanism based on standardization. In a situation as complex and uncertain as this one, coordination can best be achieved through mutual adjustment. The structure is one of adhocracy. Experts from various disciplines work together to achieve some as yet unspecified goal.
A critical success factor in these cases is the commitment of all people involved. Work cannot be split up into neat tasks. Flexibility in work patterns and work contents is important. Adherence to a strict budget cannot be enforced upon the team from above. The team members must commit themselves to the project. Management has to place emphasis on their relations with the team members.
Controlling a project of this kind is a difficult and challenging activity. To make a project of this kind manageable, our goal will be to maximize output, given the resources available to the project. This maximization may concern the quality of the product, or its functionality, or both.
Since requirements are not precisely known, some agile approach is appropriate as a process model. The larger the uncertainty, the more often we will have to check whether we are still on the right track. Thus, some development strategy involving many small steps and frequent user feedback is to be used. Cost estimation using some formalized model clearly is not feasible in these circumstances. The use of such models presupposes that we know enough of the project at hand to be able to compare it with previous projects. Such is not the case, though.
We may rely on expert judgments to achieve a rough cost estimate. Such a cost estimate, however, cannot and should not be used as a fixed anchor point as to when the project should be finished and how much it may cost. There are simply too many uncertainties involved. Rather, it provides us with some guidance as to the magnitude of the project. Based on this estimate, effort and time can be allocated for the project, for instance to produce a certain number of prototypes, a feasibility study, a pilot implementation of part of the product, or to start a certain number of time boxes. The hope is that in time the uncertainties will diminish sufficiently so that the project shifts to one of the other situations.
The four control situations discussed above are once more depicted in figure 8.2, together with a short characterization of the various control aspects discussed above.
For big projects, it may be effective to use different control mechanisms at the macro and micro level, respectively (Karlstro m and Runeson, 2005). At the macro level, management may have to coordinate the work of different teams, and report to higher management. This may require an approach in which explicit stages and corresponding milestones are distinguished. At the level of a small subteam though, one may still apply agile methods to control the day-to-day work.
By taking the different control aspects into account during the planning stage of a software development project, we can tailor the projects management to the situation at hand. In doing so, we recognize that software development projects are not all alike. Neglecting those project-specific characteristics is likely to result in project failures, failures that have often been reported upon in the literature, but equally often remain hidden from the public at large.
	8.3	Risk Management
Risk management is project management for adults Tim Lister
In the previous section, we identified global risk categories and tied them to preferred control situations. In this section, the emphasis is on individual risks and their management during project execution. In some sense too, the discussion below takes a more realistic point of view, in that we also consider adverse situations such as unrealistically tight schedules and design gold plating.
Potential risks of a project must be identified as early as possible. It is rather naive to suppose that a software project will run smoothly from start to finish. It wont. We should identify the risks of a software project early on and provide measures to deal with them. Doing so is not a sign of unwarranted pessimism. Rather, it is a sign of wisdom.
In software development, we tend to ignore risks. We assume an optimistic scenario under all circumstances and we do not reserve funds for dealing with risks. We rely on heroics when chaos sets in. If risks are identified at all, their severity is often underestimated, especially by observers higher in the hierarchy. A designer may have noticed that a certain subsystem poses serious performance problems. His manager assumes that the problem can be solved. His managers manager assumes the problem has been solved.
 
8.3. RISK MANAGEMENT
 
Problem type	Realization	Allocation	Design	Exploration
 
Product certainty	high	high	high	low
Process certainty	high	high	low	low
Resource certaintyhigh	low	low	low
Primary goal	Optimize	Acquisition,	Control of the	Maximize
in control	resource usage	training of	process	result
	Efficiency and schedule	personnel		Lower risks
Coordination,	Standardization	Standardization	Standardization	Mutual
Management	of product,	of product and	of process	adjustment
style	process, and	process		Commitment
	resources Hierarchy, separation style			Relation style
Development	Waterfall	Waterfall	Incremental	Incremental
strategy				Prototyping Agile
Cost estimation	Models	Models	Expert estimate	Expert estimate
	Guard process	Sensitivity	Sensitivity	Risk analysis
		analysis	analysis	Provide guidance
 
Figure 8.2	Four control situations (After: F.J. Heemstra, How much does software cost, Kluwer Bedrijfswetenschappen, 1989.)
A risk is a possible future negative event that may affect the success of an effort. So, a risk is not a problem, yet. It may become one, though, and risk management is concerned with preventing risks from becoming problems. Some common examples of risks and ways to deal with them, are:
Requirements may be unstable, immature, unrealistic, or excessive. If we merely list the requirements and start to realize the system in a linear development mode, it is likely that a lot of rework will be needed. This results in schedule and budget overruns, since this rework was not planned. If the requirements volatility is identified as a major risk, an evolutionary development strategy can be chosen. This situation fits the exploration-problem category as identified in the previous section.
If there is little or no user involvement during the early development stages, a real danger is that the system will not meet user needs. If this is identified as a risk, it can be mitigated, e.g. by having users participate in design reviews.
If the project involves different or complex domains, the spread of application knowledge within the project team may be an issue. Recognizing this risk may result in timely attention and resources for a training program for team members.
If the project involves more than one development site, communication problems may arise. A common way to deal with this is to pay attention to socialization issues, for instance by scheduling site visits.
At the project planning stage, risks are identified and handled. A risk management strategy involves the following steps:
1.	Identify the risk factors. There are many possible risk factors. Each organization may develop its own checklist of such factors. The top ten risk factors from (Boehm, 1989) are listed in figure 8.3.
2.	Determine the risk exposure. For each risk, we have to determine the probability that it will actually occur and the effect (e.g. in dollars or loss of man
	months) that it will have on the project. The risk exposure then equals	.
3.	Develop strategies to mitigate the risks. Usually, this will only be done for the risks that have the highest risk exposure, or for those risks whose exposure
	exceeds some threshold	.
There are three general strategies to mitigate risks: avoidance, transfer, and acceptance. We may avoid risks by taking precautions so that they will not occur: buy more memory, assign more people, provide for a training program for team members, and the like. We may transfer risks by looking for another solution, such as a prototyping approach to handle unstable requirements. Finally, we may accept risks. In the latter case, we have to provide for a contingency plan, to be invoked when the risk does become a problem.
4.	Handle risks. Risk factors must be monitored. For some risks, the avoidance or transfer actions may succeed, and those risks will never become a problem. We may be less lucky for those risks that we decided up front not to handle. Also, some of our actions may turn out to be less successful, and risks that we hoped to have handled adequately may become a problem after all. Finally, project characteristics will change over time, and so will the risks. Risk management thus is a cyclic process, and occasionally risks must be handled by re-assessing the project, invoking a contingency plan, or even a transfer to crisis mode.
Wallace and Keil (2004) give a useful categorization of risk factors. They distinguish four types of risk (see also figure 8.4):
8.3. RISK MANAGEMENT
Risk	Description
Personnel shortfall	May manifest itself in a variety of ways, such as inexperience with the domain, tools or development techniques to be used, personnel turnover, loss of critical team members, or the mere size of a team.
Unrealistic schedule/budget	Estimates may be unrealistic with respect to the requirements.
Wrong functionality	May have a variety of causes, such as an imperfect understanding of the customer needs, the complexity of communication with the client, insufficient domain knowledge of the developers and designers.
Wrong user interface	In certain situations, the user-friendliness of the interface is critical to its success.
Gold plating	Developers may wish to develop nice features not asked for by the customer.
Requirements volatility	If many requirements change during development, the amount of rework increases.
Bad external components	The quality or functionality of externally supplied components may be below what is required for this project.
Bad external tasks	Subcontractors may deliver inadequate products, or the skills obtained from outside the team may be inadequate.
Real-time shortfalls	The real-time performance of (parts of) the system may be inadequate.
Capability shortfalls	An unstable environment or new or untried technology pose a risk to the development schedule.
	Figure 8.3	Top ten risk factors
C1: Risks related to customers and users. Examples include a lack of user participation, conflicts between users, or a user organization resisting change. Part of this can be mitigated through an agile approach. But equally often, such risks are beyond the project managers control.
C2: Risks that have to do with the scope of the project and its requirements. Various factors from figure 8.3 fall into this category: wrong functionality, gold plating, requirements volatility. Project managers should be able to control this type of risk.
C3: Risks that concern the execution of the project: staffing, methodology, planning, control. Factors like personnel shortfall and an unrealistic schedule or budget belong to this category. Again, project managers should be able to control these risks.
C4: Risks that result from changes in the environment, such as changes in the organization in which the system is to be embedded, or dependencies on outsourcing partners. Project managers often have few means to control these risks.
Level of control
		low	high
low
high	customers and users (C1)	scope and requirements (C2)
	environment (C4)	execution (C3)
relative importance
	Figure 8.4	Risk categories
From a study of a large number of projects, Wallace and Keil (2004) found that risk categories C2 and C3 affect project outcomes most. They also found that execution risks (C3) are much more important in explaining process outcome that scope or requirements risks. This would suggest an ordering amongst the types of risks that managers had better pay attention to: first C3, then C2, and finally C4 and C1.
When you return to figure 8.3 after having studied the remainder of this book, you will note that many of the risk factors listed are extensively addressed in various chapters. These risk factors surface as cost drivers in cost estimation models, the quest for user involvement in requirements engineering and design, the attention for process models like prototyping and XP, and so on.
As Tom Gilb says: If you dont actively attack the risks, they will actively attack you (Gilb, 1988, p. 72).
 
8.4	Techniques for Project Planning and Control
A project consists of a series of activities. We may graphically depict the project and its constituent activities by a work breakdown structure (WBS). The WBS reflects the decomposition of a project into subtasks down to a level needed for effective planning and control. Figure 8.3 contains a very simple example of a work breakdown structure for a software development project. The activities depicted at the leaves of the work breakdown structure correspond to unit tasks, while the higher-level nodes constitute composite tasks. We will assume that each activity has a well-defined beginning and end that is indicated by a milestone, a scheduled event for which some person is held accountable and which is used to measure and control progress. The end of an activity is often a deliverable, such as a design document, while the start of an activity is often triggered by the end of some other activity.
 
Figure 8.5	Simple work breakdown structure for a software development project
Activities usually consume resources, such as people or computer time, and always have a certain duration. Activities must often be executed in a specific order. For example, we can not test a module before it is coded. This type of relation between tasks can be expressed as constraints. Usually, the constraints concern temporal relations between activities. Such constraints are also called precedence relations. Project planning involves the scheduling of all activities such that the constraints are satisfied and resource limits are not exceeded. Several techniques are available to support this scheduling task.
The activities from the simple WBS of a software development project, together with their duration and temporal constraints, are given in figure 8.6. Note that figure 8.6 contains more information on temporal relations than is given in the WBS. Though the left-to-right reading of the WBS suggests a certain time ordering, it does not give the precise precedence relations between activities.
Activity	Duration	Constraints
Design	10	--
Test plan	5	Design finished
Code A	10	Design finished
Code B	5	Design finished
Test	10	Code finished, Test plan finished
	Figure 8.6	Activities, their duration and temporal constraints
The set of activities and their constraints can also be depicted in a network. For our example, this network is given in figure 8.7. The nodes in the network denote activities. This type of network is therefore known as an activity-on-node network. Each node also carries a weight, the duration of the corresponding activity. An arrow from node A to node B indicates that activity A has to be finished before activity B can start.
These network diagrams are often termed PERT charts. PERT is an acronym for Program Evaluation and Review Technique. PERT charts were developed and first used successfully in the management of the Polaris missile program in the 1950s. While the original PERT technique was concerned solely with the time span of activities and their interrelations, subsequent developments have led to a variety of techniques that accommodate an increasing number of project factors.
From the PERT chart we may compute the earliest possible point in time at which the project can be completed. Let us assume that the network has a unique start node B and end node E. If there is more than one node with in-degree 0 (i.e. having no predecessors in the network), a new start node B is created with outgoing edges to all nodes having in-degree 0. This new node B gets a zero weight (duration). A similar procedure is followed to create the end node E if there is more than one node having out-degree 0.
	We next label each node	in the network with an ordered pair of numbers (	,
). and denote the earliest possible time at which activity can start and finish, respectively. The algorithm for doing so involves a breadth-first search of the network (cf. (Boehm, 1981)):
1.	The start node	is labeled (0,	), where	is the duration of activity	;
 
	Figure 8.7	Example of a PERT chart
2.	For all unlabeled nodes whose predecessors are all labeled nodes, the earliest possible starting time is the latest finishing time of all the predecessor nodes:
	where	is the set of predecessor nodes of	.
The corresponding finishing time is , where is the duration of activity .
	Node	is labeled as (	).
3.	Repeat Step 2 until all nodes have been labeled.
The earliest possible finishing time of the whole project now equals , being the end node of the network.
We may subsequently compute the latest point in time at which activity should finish: for each node ,
where	is the set of successor nodes of	.
The results of this computation can be graphically presented in a Gantt chart (these charts are named after their inventor). In a Gantt chart, the time span of each activity is depicted by the length of a segment drawn on an adjacent calendar. The Gantt chart of our software development example is given in figure 8.8. The gray areas show slack (or float) times of activities. It indicates that the corresponding activity may consume more than its estimated time, or start later than the earliest possible starting time, without affecting the total duration of the project. For each activity , the corresponding segment in the Gantt chart starts at time and ends at	.
Activities without slack time are on a critical path. If activities on a critical path are delayed, the total project gets delayed as well. Note that there always is at least one sequence of activities that constitutes a critical path.
 
	Figure 8.8	Example of a Gantt chart
In an activity-on-node network, the activities are depicted as nodes, while the arrows denote precedence relations between activities. Alternatively, we may depict a set of interrelated activities in an activity-on-arrow network. In an activity-on-arrow network, the arrows denote activities, while the nodes represent the completion of milestone events. Figure 8.9 depicts the example as an activity-on-arrow network. The latter representation is intuitively appealing, especially if the length of an arrow reflects the duration of the corresponding activity. Note that this type of network may have to contain dummy activities which are not needed in the activity-on-node network. These dummy activities represent synchronization of interrelated activities. In our example, dummy activities (arrows) are needed to make sure that the activity test is not started until the activities test plan, code A and code B have all been completed. The PERT technique has evolved considerably since its inception 50 years ago. For example, as well as expressing a constraint that activity B may start only after an activity A has ended, we may also specify that activity B may only start after
 
	Figure 8.9	An activity-on-arrow network
activity A has started. We may also extend the technique so that it handles resource constraints. For instance, if we have only one programmer available, the Gantt chart of figure 8.6 would not work, since it assumes that coding of modules A and B is done in parallel. The PERT technique may even be extended further to allow for sensitivity analysis. By allowing so-called what-if questions (what if we allocate three designers rather than four, what if coding module A takes two months rather than one) we get a feeling for the sensitivity of a schedule to certain variations in resource levels, schedule overruns, and the like.
Critical Path Method -- CPM -- is, as the name suggests, a technique very similar to PERT and developed at around the same time.
In our discussion, we presented a Gantt chart as a graphical visualization of a schedule that results from network analysis. Actually, we may use a Gantt chart as a scheduling mechanism in its own right. We may simply list all activities and indicate their earliest starting time and latest ending time on the calendar. Gantt charts by themselves, however, do not carry information on dependencies between activities. This makes it hard to adjust schedules, for instance when a certain activity slips. As far as planning goes, we therefore prefer the use of Gantt charts as a means to visualize the result of network analysis.
Using the information contained in the Gantt chart and knowledge of personnel resources required for each activity, we may establish a personnel plan indicating how many people are required in each unit of time. Since people costs are a major part of project expenditures, this personnel plan provides a direct means to plan project expenditures.
When the project is under way, its control is based on monitoring the projects progress and expenditures. Time spent per activity per project member can be recorded on time cards. These time cards are the basis for determining cumulative effort and expenditure. These cumulative data can be compared with the planned levels of effort and expenditure. In order to properly judge whether the project is still on track, management needs progress information as well. The most common way to provide this is via milestone reports: activities cannot be considered completed until a proper report has been produced and accepted.
The Gantt chart provides a very direct means to compare actual project status with the project schedule. Schedule slippage shows itself immediately. Slippage of activities on a critical path then necessitates prompt management action: renegotiation of the schedule, the projects deliverables, or both. Note that schedule slippage is a sneaky affair; projects get behind one day at a time. Note also that project schedules should at any point in time reflect the true project. An accepted change necessitates reconsideration of the schedule.
	8.5	Summary
In this chapter we looked at project control from a systems point of view and gained insight into how different kinds of projects can be managed and controlled. We identified four archetypal situations, which demand different process models, coordination mechanisms and management styles.
Real projects face many risks, and it is a wise project manager who pays attention to them early on. A risk is a possible future negative event that may affect success. It is not a problem yet, but it may become one. Risk management is concerned with preventing risks from becoming problems. It involves the following steps:
1.	Identify the risk factors.
2.	Determine the risk exposure, i.e. the probability that a risk will happen, multiplied by its cost.
3.	Develop strategies to mitigate risks, especially those with a high risk exposure. Risks may be avoided (e.g. by hiring more people), transferred (e.g. by choosing a different development strategy), or accepted.
4.	Handle the risks: monitor risk factors and take action when needed.
In section 8.4, we focused on the planning and control of activities within a project. By depicting the set of activities and their temporal relations in a graph, techniques like PERT offer simple yet powerful means to schedule and control these activities (see, for example, (Boehm, 1981)).
	8.6	Further Reading
Some general software project management sources are: (Boehm, 1981), (Brooks, 1995), (Humphrey, 1997b) and (Royce, 1998). Highsmith (2004) focusses on agile project management, while Boehm and Turner (2003) and Karlstro m and Runeson (2005) discuss how to combine agile and plan-based approaches. The discussion in section 8.2 is based on (Heemstra, 1989).
 
8.6. FURTHER READING
(Boehm, 1989) gives a good overview of software risk management. Risk management experiences are reported on in (Software, 1997a). The risk categories discussed in section 8.3 stem from (Wallace and Keil, 2004). Pfleeger (2000) compares software risk management with risk management in other disciplines.
Exercises
1.	List the conditions for effective systems control.
2.	Is the waterfall approach suitable for a realization-type problem? If so, why?
3.	Is the waterfall approach suitable for an exploration-type problem? If so, why?
4.	What is risk management?
5.	How can risks be mitigated?
6.	Rephrase the cost drivers of the COCOMO cost estimation model as risk factors.
7.	What is a work breakdown structure?
8.	What is a PERT chart? 9.	What is a Gantt chart?
10.	Classify a project you have been involved in with respect to product certainty, process certainty, and resource certainty. Which of the archetypal situations sketched in section 8.2 best fits this project? In what ways did actual project control differ from that suggested for the situation identified? Can you explain possible differences?
11.	Consider the patient planning system mentioned in exercise 3.12. Suppose the project team consists of several analysts and two members from the hospital staff. The analysts have a lot of experience in the design of planning systems, though not for hospitals. As a manager of this team, which coordination mechanism and management style would you opt for?
12.	Discuss the pros and cons of a hierarchical as well as a matrix team organization for the patient planning project.
13.	Consider a project you have been involved in. Identify the major irregular, control, and goal variables for this project. In what ways did the control variables influence project control?
14.	Suppose one of your team members is dissatisfied with his situation. He has been involved in similar projects for several years now. You have assigned

him these jobs because he was performing so well. Discuss possible actions to prevent this employee from leaving the organization.
15.	Why is planning (i.e., the activity) more important than the plan (the document)?
16.	Suppose you are the manager of a project that is getting seriously behind schedule. Your team is having severe problems with testing a particular subsystem. Your client is pressing you to deliver the system on time. How would you handle this situation? How would you handle the situation if you were a member of the team and your manager was not paying serious attention to your signals?

Part II
The Software Life Cycle
CONTENTS
Chapter 9	Requirements Engineering	199
Chapter 10Modeling	246
Chapter 11Software Architecture	276
Chapter 12Software Design	313
Chapter 13Software Testing	394
Chapter ?? Software Maintenance	453
Chapter ?? Software Tools	494
When designing a garden, you begin by formulating your requirements -how large should the grass-area be, should you leave a corner to raise potatoes, where should the sand-bin be put, do not the requirements interfere with future maintenance work on the house (!), etc. After that, a design is drawn up which is carefully documented in a blueprint. Only then will the gardener cut the first sod. A similar approach is followed when developing software. In a number of phases -- requirements engineering, design, implementation, testing -- the software system will take shape. After the software is delivered to the client it must be maintained. Reiteration of phases occurs because changes have to be incorporated and errors must be corrected. The result is a highly cyclical process, the so-called software life cycle.
The various phases of the initial development cycle are the topics of chapters 9--13, and chapter 14 is devoted to software maintenance. In each phase, modeling techniques are used to represent the results of that phase. A sample of well-known
 
200
modeling techniques is discussed in chapter 10. In each phase also, tools are employed. The main classes of tools and their role in the software development process are discussed in chapter 15.
9
Requirements Engineering
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To understand that requirements engineering is a cyclical process involving four types of activity: elicitation, specification, validation, and negotiation
To appreciate the role of social and cognitive issues in requirements engineering
To be able to distinguish a number of requirements elicitation techniques
To be aware of the contents of a requirements specification document
To know various techniques and notations for specifying requirements
To know different ways to structure a set of requirements
This chapter covers requirements engineering, the first major phase in a software development project. The most challenging and difficult aspect of requirements engineering is to get a complete description of the problem to be solved. We discuss a number of techniques for eliciting requirements from the user. Following elicitation, these requirements must be negotiated, validated, and documented.
The hardest single part of building a system is deciding what to build
(Brooks, 1987)
The requirements engineering phase is the first major step towards the solution of a data processing problem. During this phase, the users requirements with respect to the future system are carefully identified and documented. These requirements concern both the functions to be provided and a number of additional requirements, such as those regarding performance, reliability, user documentation, user training, cost, and so on. During the requirements engineering phase we do not yet address the question of how to achieve these user requirements in terms of system components and their interaction. This is postponed until the design phase.
A requirement is a condition or capability needed by a user to solve a problem or achieve an objective (IEEE610, 1990). The user alluded to in this definition may be an end user of the system, a person behind the screen. However, it may also denote several classes of indirect users, such as people who do not themselves turn the knobs but rather use the information that the system delivers. It may also denote the client (customer) who pays the bill. During requirements engineering, different types of user may be the source of different types of requirements. Hopefully, the end users will be the main source of information regarding the functional, task-related requirements. Other requirements, e.g. those that relate to security issues, may well be phrased by other stakeholders.
The word requirement suggests that, once stated, it has to be met. In reality, this hardly ever is the case. Most requirements are negotiable. Time to market, cost, conflicting quality requirements, and conflicting needs of stakeholders all lead to a situation where tradeoffs may have to be made.
The result of the requirements engineering phase is documented in the requirements specification. The requirements specification reflects the mutual understanding of the problem to be solved between the analyst and the client. It is the basis for a contract, be it formal or informal, between the client of the system and the development organization. Eventually, the system delivered will be assessed by testing its compliance with the requirements specification.
The requirements specification serves as a starting point for the next phase, the design phase. In the design phase the architecture of the system is devised in terms of system components and interfaces between those components. The design phase results in a specification as well: a precise description -- preferably in some formal language -- of the design architecture, its components, and its interfaces.
 
The notion specification thus has several meanings. To prevent confusion, we will always use the prefix requirements if it denotes the result of the requirements engineering phase.
To make matters worse, the phase in which the users requirements are analyzed and documented is also sometimes called specification. We feel this to be somewhat of a misnomer and will not use the term as such.
We use the term requirements engineering rather than the narrower notion of requirements analysis to emphasize that it is an iterative and co-operative process of analyzing a problem, documenting the resulting observations, and checking the accuracy of the understanding gained. Requirements engineering not only involves technical concerns of how to represent the requirements. Social and cognitive aspects play a dominant role as well.
Requirements engineering and design generally cannot be strictly separated in time. In some cases, the requirements specification is very formal and can be viewed as a high-level design specification of the system to be built. Often, a preliminary design is done after an initial set of requirements has been determined. Based on the result of this design effort, the requirements specification may be changed and refined. This type of iteration also occurs when prototyping techniques are being used. In pure agile development projects, requirements emerge concurrently with an up-and-running system. Well-known techniques such as data flow diagrams and UML class diagrams are used to structure and document both requirements specifications and designs.
It is only for ease of presentation that the requirements engineering and design phases are strictly separated and treated consecutively in this book.
During requirements engineering, a number of quite different matters are being addressed. Let us look at an example and consider the (hypothetical) case of a universitys library automating its operation. We will start with the library containing a number of cabinets. These cabinets hold a huge number of cards, one per book. Each card contains the names of the authors, the book title, ISBN, publication year, and other useful data. The cards are ordered alphabetically by the name of the first author of each book.
This ordering system in fact presents major problems as it only works well if we know the first authors name. If we only know the title, or if we are interested in books on a certain topic, the author catalog is of little or no help.
A software solution seems obvious. If we store the data for each book once in a database, we may subsequently sort the entries in many different ways. Appropriate tools can enable the user to search the database interactively. By providing internet access to the database, service can be greatly enhanced.
During the requirements engineering phase, a number of user requirements will be raised. Some of those requirements will concern updating the database, that is adding, deleting and changing records. Others will concern functions to be provided to ordinary members of the library, such as:
	Give a list of all books written by X;
	Give a list of all books whose title contains Y;
	Give a list of all books on topic Z;
	Give a list of all books that arrived after date D.
It is expedient to try somehow to group user requirements into a few categories, ranging from essential requirements to nice features. As noted in chapter 3, users tend to have difficulties in articulating their real needs. Chances are, then, that much effort is spent on realizing features which later turn out to be mere bells and whistles. By using a layered scheme in both the formulation of user requirements and their subsequent realization, some of the problems that beset software development projects can be circumvented. In our library system example, for instance, the requirement Give a list of all books that arrived after date D could be classified as a nice feature. Service is not seriously degraded if this function is not provided, since we may temporarily place the acquisitions on a dedicated shelf.
It is also possible to try to predict a number of future requirements, which will not be implemented in the present project. It is, however, sensible to pay attention to these matters at an early stage, so that they can be accommodated during the design of the system. Possible future requirements of our library system could include such things as:
	Storing information about books that have been ordered but have not been received;
	Storing information about library members, such as their name and address, and the dates on which books are lent to them, which can then be used to generate a reminder notice for books not returned on time.
The above functions concern the use of the software by library members and library personnel. There are other stakeholders as well, though. For example, library management may wish to use the system to get information on member profiles in order to improve the title acquisition process.
Besides these requirements, which directly relate to the functions of the software to be delivered, a number of other matters should be addressed during the requirements engineering phase. For our library example, as a minimum, the following points have to be addressed:
On which machine will the system be implemented, and which operating system will be used? If the data is to be stored in some DBMS, which (type of) DBMS is to be used? What type of access is to be used and how many access points will be supported?
Which classes of users can be distinguished? In our example, both library personnel and library members will have to be served. What kind of knowledge do these users have? Will certain functions of the system be restricted to certain classes of user? Normal library members will probably not be allowed to update the database or print the contents of the database.
What is the size of the database and how is it expected to grow in the course of time? These factors influence both storage capacity needed and algorithms to be used. For a database containing several thousands of books, some not very efficient searching algorithm might suffice. For the Library of Congress, the situation is quite different, though.
What response time should the system offer? A search request for a certain book will have to be answered fairly quickly. If the user has to wait too long for an answer, he will become dissatisfied and search the shelves directly. Related questions concern the interaction between response time and the expected number of question sessions per unit of time.
How much will a system of this kind cost? In our library example, we should not only pay attention to the direct costs incurred by the software development effort. The cost of converting the information contained in the present file cabinets to a suitable database format should not be neglected. These, less visible, indirect costs may well outweigh the direct cost of designing and implementing the new system.
This relatively simple example already shows that it is not sufficient to merely list the functional requirements of the new system. The systems envisioned environment and its interaction with that environment should be analyzed as well.
In our example, this concerns the library itself, to start with. The consequences of introducing a system like this one can be much greater than it seems at first sight. Working procedures may change, necessitating retraining of personnel, changes in personnel functions and the overall organizational structure. Some members of staff may even become redundant. Checking whether membership fees have been paid might involve interfacing with the financial system, owned by another department.
In general, the setting up of an automated system may have more than just technical repercussions. Often, not enough attention is paid to these other repercussions. The lack of success of many software development projects can be traced back to a neglect of non-technical aspects.
In practice, the requirements engineering process often is more complex than sketched above:
Ordinary library automation is a relatively well-known domain, where we may expect users to be able to articulate their requirements. But suppose our library system also has to support elderly people in their dealings with the world around them, including daily news, relevant government regulations, information about healthcare, and the like. For the latter type of support, a more agile approach seems more appropriate, where the requirements emerge as we go along, rather than being elicited up front.
Much software developed today however is market-driven rather than customerdriven. For example, rather than developing a system for one specific library, we could develop a generic library application. Requirements for this generic library application are created by exploring the library domain, while trade-offs between requirements are based on market considerations, product fit, and the like. We may decide that our system need not address the concerns of the Library of Congress (too small a market), while it should definitely interface with accounting system Y, since that system is widely used in university departments, and this is perceived to be an important market for our library application.
For different reasons (cost, time to market, quality) we may want to employ commercial off the shelf (COTS) components in our library system. We then have to tradeoff our requirements against the possibilities offered by those COTS components.
Following Sommerville (2005), we distinguish four processes in requirements engineering:
Requirements elicitation In general, the requirements analyst is not an expert in the domain being modeled. Through interaction with domain specialists, such as professional librarians, he has to build himself a sufficiently rich model of that domain. Thus, requirements elicitation is about understanding the problem. The fact that different disciplines are involved in this process complicates matters. In many cases, the analyst is not a mere outside observer of the domain to be modeled, simply eliciting facts from domain specialists. He may have to take a stand in a power struggle or decide between conflicting requirements, thereby actively participating in the construction of the domain of interest. Section 9.1 discusses various issues related to, and a number of techniques used in, requirements elicitation.
Requirements specification Once the problem is understood, it has to be described. In section 9.2, we give guidelines for the contents of a requirements specification document. This document describes the product to be delivered, not the process of how it is developed. Project requirements are described in the project plan, discussed in chapter 2. The collection of requirements not only has to be documented, it also has to be managed during the course of a project. Quite a number of techniques exist for specifying requirements, ranging from very informal (natural language) to very formal (mathematical). Throughout this book, a number of such modeling techniques are discussed, such as object-oriented techniques in chapter 10, and techniques for specifying quality requirements in chapter 6. The design techniques discussed in chapter 12 are often also used for specifying requirements. Section 9.3 is confined to a discussion of some of the basic techniques for modeling requirements.
 
Requirements validation and verification Once the problem is described, the different parties involved have to agree upon its nature. We have to ascertain that the correct requirements are stated (validation) and that these requirements are stated correctly (verification). Some verification and validation techniques that can be applied at this early stage are sketched in section 9.4.
Requirements negotiation Usually, requirements have to be negotiated. Because of time constraints or other factors, a selection may have to be made from the list of requirements put forth. Or stakeholders may have conflicts that need to be resolved. Often, stakeholders have conflicting quality requirements whose impact can only be determined by looking at the software architecture. This is further dealt with in chapter 11.
Obviously, these processes involve iteration and feedback. In document-driven approaches, these iterations preceed design and implementation. In agile processes, design and implementation is part of the iteration and feedback loop. In either case, there is a central repository in which the requirements are documented. The major interactions are shown in figure 9.1.
The emphasis in our discussion of requirements engineering will be on modeling the external behavior of the system, i.e. all those parts and aspects of the system that end users consider important. Other views are relevant as well, for instance, a model which highlights the way the system supports the business, or a model which indicates how a system is deployed on a collection of hardware devices. Some of these other views are discussed in chapter 11.
9.1	Requirements Elicitation
In chapter 1, the first part of the software life cycle was depicted as shown in figure 9.2. The fact that the text requirements specification is placed in a rectangle suggests, not unjustly, that it concerns something very concrete and explicit. The problem is less well defined, less clear, even fuzzy in many cases. The primary goal of the requirements engineering phase is to elicit the contours and constituents of this fuzzy problem. This process is also known as conceptual modeling.
During requirements engineering we are modeling part of reality. The part of reality in which we are interested is referred to as the universe of discourse (UoD). Example UoDs are a library system, a factory automation system, an assembly line, an elevator system.
The model constructed during the requirements engineering phase is an explicit conceptual model of the UoD. The adjective explicit indicates that the model must be able to be communicated to the relevant people (such as analysts and users). To this end it should contain all relevant information from the UoD. One of the persistent problems of requirements analysis and, for that matter, analysis in general, is to account for all of the relevant influences and leave out irrelevant details.
 
	Figure 9.1	A framework for the requirements engineering process (adapted from
(Sommerville, 2005))
 
	Figure 9.2	The first part of the software life cycle
In our library example we could easily have overlooked the fact that in a number of cases the authors name as it appears on the cover of a book is not the canonical authors name. This phenomenon occurs in particular with authors from countries that use non-Latin scripts. The transcription of the Russian name 4EXOB reads Chekhov in English and Tsjechow in Dutch. In such cases, librarians want to include the authors name twice: once the name is spelled as it appears on the book, and once the name is spelled as it is used in the various search processes. An answer to a question like which books by Chekhov does our library possess? should also inform us about the non-English titles.
Subtle mismatches between the analysts notion of terms and concepts and their proper meaning within the domain being modeled can have profound effects. Such mismatches can most easily occur in domains we already know, such as a library. An illuminating discussion of potential problems in (formally) specifying requirements of a library system can be found in (Wing, 1988). Problems noted include:
A library employee may also be a member of the library, so the two sets of system users are not disjoint;
There is a difference between a book (identified by its ISBN) and the (physical) copies of a book owned by the library;
It is not sufficient to simply denote the status of a book by a boolean value present/not present (i.e. lent out). For instance, a book or, more properly, a copy of a book, may be lost, stolen, or in repair.
People involved in a UoD have an implicit conceptual model of that UoD. An implicit conceptual model consists of the background knowledge shared by people in the UoD. The fact that this knowledge is shared gives rise to of course statements by people from within the UoD, because this knowledge is taken for granted. (Of course, a copy of a book is not the same as a book.) Part of the implicit conceptual model is not verbalized. It contains tacit knowledge, knowledge that is skillfully applied and functions in the background. Finally, an implicit conceptual model contains habits, customs, prejudices and even inconsistencies.
During conceptual modeling, an implicit conceptual model is turned into an explicit one. In doing so, the analyst is confronted with two types of problem: analysis problems and negotiation problems. Analysis problems arise from the fact that part of the implicit conceptual model is not verbalized, that the implicit conceptual model evolves with time, that the user and analyst talk a different language, and that the implicit conceptual model cannot be completely codified. Negotiation problems arise because people in the UoD may counteract the analysis process, because the implicit conceptual models of people in the UoD may differ, or because of opposing interests of people involved (such as library personnel versus their managers). Both types of problems are discussed below.
The problem to be addressed by the automated system arises from the user, a human. This person must be able to describe this problem in both a correct and complete way. It must be communicated to a person who in general has a rather different background. The analyst often lacks a sufficiently profound knowledge of the application domain in which the problem originated. He has to learn the language of the application domain and become acquainted with its terminology, concepts and procedures. Especially in large projects, the application knowledge tends to be thinly spread amongst the specialists involved, which easily leads to integration and coordination difficulties.
In our earlier example, it is the librarian who has to express his wishes. It is possible that the inclusion of two author names (Tsjechow and Chekhov) is seen as an obvious detail which need not be brought forward explicitly. The analyst at the other side of the table may still get the impression that he has a complete picture of the system. This type of omission may have severe consequences.
A number of years back a large automated air defense system was being developed in the US. During one of the final tests of this system, an alarm signal was issued. One of the computers detected an unknown missile. It turned out to be the moon. This possibility had not been thought of.
Eliciting correct and complete information is an important prerequisite for success. This turns out to be rather problematic in practice. Asking the prospective user what is wanted does not generally work. More often than not we get a rather incomplete and inaccurate picture of the situation. Important reasons for this are the human limitations for processing information, selecting information, and solving problems. These limited human capabilities are yet aggravated by such factors as:
	the complexity and variation in requirements that can be imposed upon software;
	the differences in background between the client, or user, and the software specialist.
In research on human information processing one often uses a model in which human memory consists of two components: a short-term memory in which information is being processed, and a long-term memory in which the permanent knowledge is stored. Short-term memory has a limited capacity: one often says that it has about seven slots. Long-term memory on the other hand has a very large capacity.
So, information is processed in a relatively small part of human memory. Longterm memory is thus accessed in an indirect way. In addition, humans also employ external memories when information is being processed: a blackboard, a piece of paper, etc.
If a person being interviewed during requirements engineering only uses his shortterm memory, the limitations thereof may have an impact on the results. This may easily occur if no use is being made of external memories. Things can be forgotten, simply because our short-term memory has limited capacity.
Humans are also inclined to be prejudiced about selecting and using information. We are, in particular, inclined to let recent events prevail. In making up a requirements specification, this leads to requirements bearing on the present situation, presently available information, recent events, etc.
Humans are not very capable of rational thinking. They will simplify things and use a model which does not really fit reality. Other limitations that influence our model of reality are determined by such factors as education, prejudice, practice, etc. This same kind of simplification occurs when software requirements are drawn up. And the result will be limited by the same factors.
We cannot always expect the user to be able to precisely state his requirements at an early stage. One reason for investigating the opportunities of automation is often because of a certain dissatisfaction with the present situation. One is not satisfied with the present situation and has the impression that automation will help. Whether this is true or not -- many data processing problems are organizational problems -- simply automating the present situation is not always the solution. Something different is wanted, though it is not clear what. Only when insight into the possibilities of automation is gained, will real requirements show themselves. This is one of the reasons for the sheer size of the maintenance problem. About half of the maintenance effort concerns adapting software to (new) requirements of the user. To counteract this trend, software development process models that acknowledge this learning process, such as prototyping, incremental development, and agile methodss are to be preferred over those that dont, i.e. the waterfall model and its variants.
Through a careful analysis, we may hope to build a sound perspective of user requirements and anticipate future changes. However, no matter how much time is spent in a dialog with the prospective users, future changes remain hard to foresee. We may even go one step further and stipulate that requirements will never be complete. In this respect, specifying requirements has much in common with weather-forecasting: there is a limit to how far the future can be predicted.
In a situation where the goal of a software development project is to improve an existing system, be it a manual process or a (partly) automated one, it is generally helpful to explicitly distinguish two modeling steps. In the first step, the current situation is modeled. Based on an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the current situation, the situation-to-be is next modeled. Business Process Redesign, in particular, stresses the distinction between these two modeling steps.
For the requirements engineering phase to be successful we need methods and techniques that try to bypass the difficulties sketched above. The degree to which powerful techniques are required depends on the experience of the people involved in the requirements engineering phase (both users and analysts) and the expertise of the analyst with the application domain. Section 9.1.2 discusses a number of techniques for requirements elicitation.
But before we discuss these techniques, we first elaborate in section 9.1.1 how different world views result in different approaches to requirements engineering. In section 9.1.3 we discuss how requirements relate to higher level goals, and how different viewpoints may result in different, and sometimes conflicting, sets of requirements. Following section 9.1.3 we discuss how to prioritize requirements, and how requirements relate to the selection of COTS components.
	9.1.1	Requirements Engineering Paradigms
Most requirements engineering methods, and software development methods in general, are Taylorian in nature. Around the turn of this century, Taylor introduced the notion of scientific management, in which tasks are recursively decomposed into simpler tasks and each task has one best way to accomplish it. By careful observations and experiments this one best way can be found and formalized into procedures and rules. Scientific management has been successfully applied in many a factory operation. The equivalent in requirements engineering is to interview domain experts and observe end users at work in order to obtain the real user requirements. After this, the experts go to work and implement these requirements. During the latter process there is no further need to interact with the user community. This view of software development is a functional, and rational, one. Its underlying assumption is that there is one objective truth, which merely needs to be discovered during the analysis process.
Though this view has its merits in drawing up requirements in purely technical realms, many UoDs of interest involve people as well -- people whose model of the world is incomplete, subjective, irrational, and may conflict with the world view of others. In such cases, the analyst is not a passive outside observer of the UoD. Rather, he actively participates in the shaping of the UoD.
It is increasingly being recognized that the Taylorian, functional, approach is not the only, and need not be the most appropriate, approach to the requirements engineering process.
Analysts have a set of assumptions about the nature of the subject of study. Such a set of assumptions is commonly called a paradigm. In our field, these assumptions concern the way in which analysts acquire knowledge (epistemological assumptions) and their view of the social and technical world (ontological assumptions).
The assumptions about knowledge result in an objectivist--subjectivist dimension. If the analyst takes the objectivist point of view, he applies models and methods derived from the natural sciences to arrive at the one and only truth. In the subjectivist position, his principal concern is to understand how the individual creates, modifies and interprets the world he or she is in.
The assumptions about the world result in an order--conflict dimension. The order point of view emphasizes order, stability, integration, and consensus. On the other hand, the conflict view stresses change, conflict, and disintegration.
These two dimensions and their associated extreme positions yield four paradigms for requirements engineering and, more generally, information systems development:
Functionalism (objective--order). In the functionalist paradigm, the developer is the system expert who searches for measurable cause--effect relationships. An empirical organizational reality is believed to exist, independent of the observer. Systems are developed to support rational organizational operation. Their effectiveness and efficiency can be tested objectively, by tests similar to those used in other engineering disciplines.
Social-relativism (subjective--order). In this paradigm, the analyst operates as a facilitator. Reality is not something immutable out there, but is constructed in the human mind. The analyst is a change agent. He seeks to facilitate the learning of all people involved.
Radical-structuralism (objective--conflict). In the radical paradigm the key assumption is that system development intervenes in the conflict between two or more social classes for power, prestige, and resources. Systems are often developed to support the interests of the owners, at the expense of the interests of labor. In order to redress the power balance, this paradigm suggests that the analyst should act as a labor partisan. System requirements should evolve from a cooperation between labor and the analyst. This approach is thought to lead to systems that enhance craftsmanship and working conditions.
Neohumanism (subjective--conflict). The central theme in this paradigm is emancipation. Systems are developed to remove distorting influences and other barriers to rational discourse. The system developer acts as a social therapist in an attempt to draw together, in an open discussion, a diverse group of individuals, including customers, labor, and various levels of management.
Admittedly, these paradigms reflect extreme orientations. In practice, some mixture of assumptions will usually guide the requirements engineering process. Yet it is fair to say that the majority of system development techniques emphasizes the functionalist view.
In the subjectivist--objectivist dimension, it is important to realize that a good deal of subjectivism may be involved in the shaping of the UoD. If we have to develop a system to, say, control a copying machine, we may safely take a functional stand. We may expect such a machine to operate purely rationally. In the analysis process, we list the functions of the machine, its internal signals, conditions, and so on, in order to get a satisfactory picture of the system to be developed. Once these requirements are identified, they can be frozen and some waterfall-like process model can be employed to realize the system.
If, however, our task is to develop a system to support people in doing their job, such as some office automation system, a purely functional view of the world may easily lead to ill-conceived systems. In such cases, end-user participation in the shaping of the UoD is of paramount importance. Through an open dialog with the people concerned, we may encourage the prospective users to influence the system to be developed. Part of the analysts job in this case is to reconcile the views of the participants in the analysis process. Continuous feedback during the actual construction phases with possibilities for redirection may further enhance the chance of success. It is the future users who are going to work with the system. It is of no avail to confront them with a system that does not satisfy their needs.
Automation transforms organizations, and thus affects the organizations employees. It may raise fears and other emotions with the employees affected. For instance, our library system potentially gives people access to a lot more information than they previously had. Some people though may prefer to have access only to information related to their tasks and responsibilities. During requirements engineering, we have to be conscious about these effects. The pure functionalist paradigm then is of no avail.
A dissatisfied user will try to neglect the system or, at best, express additional requirements immediately. The net result is that the envisaged gain in efficiency or effectiveness is not reaped.
An illuminating and well-documented example of possible effects of following a fairly radical paradigm is given in (Page et al., 1993); see also section 1.4.3. The system concerns the Computer Aided Despatch System for the London Ambulance Service. Though the system would significantly impact the way ambulance crews carried out their jobs, there was little consultation with them. Some of the consequences of this approach were the following (Page et al., 1993, pp 40--41):
	The system allocated the nearest available resource regardless of originating station, so crews often had to operate further and further from their home base. This resulted in them operating in unfamiliar territory with further to go to reach their home station at the end of a shift.
	The new system took away the flexibility crews previously had for the station to decide on which resource to allocate. This inevitably led to problems when a different resource was used to the one that was allocated.
	The lack of voice contact made the whole process more impersonal and exacerbated the them and us situation.
If the conceptual models of the participants differ, we may either look for a compromise, or opt for one of the views expressed. It is impossible to give general guidelines on how to handle such cases. Looking for a compromise can be a tedious affair and may lead to a system that no one is really happy with. Opting for one particular view of the world will make one party happy, but may result in others completely neglecting the system developed. Worse yet, they may decide to develop a competing system.
	9.1.2	Requirements Elicitation Techniques
The two main sources of information for the requirements elicitation process are the users and the (application) domain. These sources both presuppose that there exists something out there to start with, and from which requirements can be elicited. In market-driven software development though, this is often not the case, and requirements elicitation in such projects is more like requirements invention or problem-formulation, guided by marketing and sales considerations.
Figure 9.3 lists a number of elicitation techniques, which are elaborated upon below. The figure also tells us that the user is the major source of information in some techniques, while the domain is predominant in others. Furthermore, the figure indicates whether each technique is particularly useful to model the current, as opposed to the anticipated future, situation.
You should generally vacuum a rug in two directions rather than one; likewise, you should use multiple requirements elicitation techniques.
 	 	 
 	 
 
 	 
	Figure 9.3	A sample of requirements elicitation techniques
Asking We may simply ask the users what they expect from the system. A presupposition then is that the user is able to bypass his own limitations and prejudices. Asking may take the form of an interview, a brainstorm, or a questionnaire. In an open-ended interview, the user freely talks about his tasks. This is the easiest form of requirements elicitation, but it suffers from all of the drawbacks mentioned before. In a structured interview, the analyst tries to overcome these by leading the user, for example through closed or probing questions.
In discussion sessions with a group of users, we often find that some users are far more articulate than others, and thus have a greater influence on the outcome. The consensus thus reached need not be well-balanced. To overcome this problem, a Delphi technique may be employed. The Delphi technique is an iterative technique in which information is exchanged in a written form until a consensus is reached. For example, participants may write down their requirements, sorted in order of importance. The sets of requirements thus obtained are distributed to all participants, who reflect on them to obtain a revised set of requirements. This procedure is repeated several times until sufficient consensus is reached.
For consumer products, such as word processing packages, antivirus software or software for your personal administration, users often have the option to give feedback, raise questions, report bugs, and the like, electronically. This type of information is also regularly gathered and stored by sales and marketing people in the course of their contacts with customers. These logs can be mined and in this way provide a valuable source of information when looking for requirements for the next release of that software.
Task analysis Employees working in some domain perform a number of tasks, such as handling requests to borrow a book, cataloging new books, ordering books, etc. Higher-level tasks may be decomposed into subtasks. For example, the task handle request to borrow a book may lead to the following subtasks:
	check member identification,
	check for limit on the number of books that may be borrowed,
	register book as being borrowed by the library member,
	issue a slip indicating the due back date.
Task analysis is a technique to obtain a hierarchy of tasks and subtasks to be carried out by people working in the domain. Any of the other techniques discussed may be used to get the necessary information to draw this hierarchy. There are no clear-cut rules as to when to stop decomposing tasks. A major heuristic is that at some point users tend to refuse to decompose tasks any further. For instance, when being asked how the member identification is checked, the library employee may say Well, I simply check his id. At this point, further decomposition is meaningless.
Task analysis is often applied at the stage when (details about) the human-computer interaction component are being decided upon. This underestimates its potency as a general requirements elicitation technique. It also gives the (wrong) impression that users are only concerned with the look and feel of the interface.
Scenario-based analysis Instead of looking for generic plans as in interviews or task analysis, the analyst may study instances of tasks. A scenario is a story which tells us how a specific task instance is executed. The scenario can be real or artificial. An example of a real scenario is that the analyst observes how a library employee handles an actual user request. We may ask the library employee to verbalize what he is doing and make an audio or video recording thereof. This think aloud method is a fairly unobtrusive technique to study people at work. It is often used to assess prototypes or existing information systems.
Alternatively, we may construct artificial scenarios and discuss these with the user. As a first shot, we may for example draw up the following scenario for returning a book:
1.	The due back date for the book is checked. If the book is overdue, the member is asked to pay the appropriate fine.
2.	The book is recorded as again being eligible for checking-out.
3.	The book is put back in its proper place.
When this scenario is discussed with the library employee, a number of related issues may crop up, either through probing questions from the analyst, or because the user contrasts the scenario with daily practice. Example questions that could be raised include such things as:
	What happens when the person returning the book is not a registered member of the library?
	What happens when the book returned is damaged?
	What happens if the member returning this book has other books that are overdue or an outstanding reservation for another book?
In essence, this type of story-telling provides the user with an artificial mock-up version of the software eventually to be delivered. It serves as a paper-based prototype to gain a better understanding of the requirements. If tied to a UML-type of modeling, scenario-based analysis is often called use-case analysis; see section 10.3.6. Scenarios and use cases are the elicitation methods most often used.
Scenario-based analysis is often done in a somewhat haphazard way. In that case, there is no way of telling whether enough scenarios have been drawn up and a sufficiently accurate and complete picture of the requirements is obtained. Writing good scenarios is by no means easy. Though it may look trivial to just record user episodes, a fair mount of domain expertise is needed to get a good and reliable set of scenarios.
Scenarios can be looked at from different perspectives. In the above example scenario for returning a book, the scenario lists a series of actions or events that together make up some episode. The focus then is on the process aspect, showing how the system proceeds through successive states. Alternatively, the same scenario may be looked at from a user perspective: how will the user interact with the system, what functionalities will she be offered? Yet another perspective is that the scenario leads to discussions about alternatives from which a certain choice has to be made, as in the questions that the example scenario above raised.
Ethnography A major disadvantage of eliciting requirements through, for example, interviews is that the analyst imposes his view of how the world is ordered onto the user. Such methods may fail if the analyst and user do not share a category system. The analyst may, for example, ask the following:
If a member wants to borrow a book while he or she still has an outstanding fine, will you:
a)	Refuse the request, or
b)	Handle the request anyway
This binary choice need not map actual practice. The library employee may, for example, grant the request provided part of the outstanding fine is settled or if he knows the member to be trustworthy.
Thinking aloud protocols are based on the idea that users have well-defined goals and subgoals, and that they traverse such goal trees in a neat top-down manner. People however often do not have preconceived plans, but rather proceed in somewhat opportunistic ways.
A disadvantage of task analysis is that it considers individual tasks of individual persons, without taking into account the social and organizational environment in which these tasks are executed.
Ethnographic methods are claimed not to have such shortcomings. In ethnography, groups of people are studied in their natural settings. It is well-known from sociology, where for example Polynesian tribes are studied by living with them for an extended period of time. Likewise, user requirements can be studied by participating in their daily work for a period of time, for example by becoming a library employee. The analyst becomes an apprentice, recognizing that the future users of the system are the real experts in their work. Ethnographic methods are more likely to uncover tacit knowledge than most other elicitation techniques.
Form analysis A lot of information about the domain being modeled can often be found in various forms being used. For example, to request some conference proceedings from another library, the user might have to fill in a form such as given in figure 9.4.
 	
 	 
	Figure 9.4	A sample form
Forms provide us with information about the data objects of the domain, their properties, and their interrelations. They are particularly useful as an input to modeling the data aspect of the system; see also section 10.1.1.
Library users often have incomplete knowledge of the information sources they are interested in. For example, someone might be looking for the proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering that took place in Berlin. Only if the various entries from the above form are used as entities in the underlying data model, can such a query be answered easily. In this case, the form directly points at a useful requirement which might otherwise go unnoticed.
Natural language descriptions Like forms, natural language descriptions provide a lot of useful information about the domain to be modeled. The operating instructions for library employees might for instance contain a paragraph like the one given in figure 9.5. This text gives us such information as:
	There are (at least) two accounts that orders can be charged to;
	There is a list of staff members authorized to sign off such requests;
	There is the possibility of ordering multiple copies of titles, such as this book on Software Engineering, on behalf of students.
 
Title acquisition
Before a request to acquire a title can be complied with, form B has to be filled in completely. A request can not be handled if it is not signed by an authorized staff member or the account to be charged (Student or Staff) is not indicated. A request is not to be granted if the title requested is already present in the title catalog, unless it is marked Stolen or Lost, or the account is Student.
 
	Figure 9.5	A sample instruction for library employees
Often, natural language descriptions (and forms) provide the analyst with background information to be used in conjunction with other elicitation techniques such as interviews. Natural language descriptions in particular tend to assume a lot of tacit knowledge by the reader. For example, if form B contains an ISBN, this saves the library employee some work, but the request will probably still be handled if this information is not provided. A practical problem with natural language descriptions is that they are often not kept up-to-date. Like software documentation, their validity tends to deteriorate with time.
Natural language descriptions are often taken as a starting point in object-oriented analysis techniques. This is further discussed in section 12.3.
Derivation from an existing system Starting from an existing system, for instance a similar system in some other organization or a description in a text book, we may formulate the requirements of the new system. Obviously, we have to be careful and take the peculiar circumstances of the present situation into account.
Rather than looking at one particular system, we may also study a number of systems in some application domain. This meta-requirements analysis process is known as domain analysis. Its goal generally is to identify reusable components, concepts, structures, and the like. It is dangerous to look for reusable requirements in immature domains. Requirements may then be reused simply because they are available, not because they fit the situation at hand. They become dead wood. In the context of requirements analysis, domain analysis can be viewed as a technique for deriving a reference model for systems within a given domain. Such a reference model provides a skeleton (architecture) that can be augmented and adapted to fit the specific situation at hand.
Domain analysis is further discussed in chapter ??, in the context of software reuse and software product line development.
Business Process Redesign (BPR). In many software development projects, the people involved jump to conclusions rather quickly: automation is the answer. Even worse, their conclusion might be that automating the current situation is the answer. In Business Process Redesign (or Business Process Reengineering), a rather different strategy is followed. It is an organizational activity to radically redesign business processes to achieve competitive breakthroughs in, e.g. quality, cost, or user satisfaction. In BPR, we depart completely from the existing ways of doing things. In BPR, the following steps are distinguished:
1.	Identify processes for innovation. Two major approaches for doing so are the exhaustive and high-impact approach. In the exhaustive approach, an attempt is made to identify all processes, which are then prioritized for their redesign urgency. The high-impact approach attempts to identify the most important processes only, or the ones that conflict with the business vision.
2.	Identify change levers. In this step, opportunities facilitating process improvement are identified. Three types of lever can be recognized: organizational enablers (such as empowering teams), human resource enablers (such as task enrichment) and information technology enablers.
3.	Develop process visions. For redesign to be successful, the organization needs to know which goals it wants to reach. This is described in the process vision. The main components of a process vision are: process objectives (measurable targets of the future performance of the system), process attributes (qualitative and descriptive properties of the future process), critical success factors and constraints (organizational, cultural, and technological).
4.	Understand the existing process. This includes documenting the existing process, measuring it, and identifying problematic aspects. It allows us to assess the health of the existing process, and brings problems to the surface.
5.	Design and prototype the new process. This is the final step. Prototyping makes it possible to try out new structures, thereby reducing the risk of failure.
BPR is not really a requirements elicitation technique proper. It is mentioned here because it emphasizes an essential issue to be addressed during the requirements engineering phase. Business processes should not be driven by information technology. Rather, information technology should enable them. Though a complete BPR effort is not necessary or feasible in many situations, rethinking the existing processes and procedures is a step which is all too often thoughtlessly skipped in software development projects.
As an example, consider our library automation project once again. Careful inspection of the current situation might reveal that things arent all that bad. However, the impression is that the number of requests that could not be granted has steadily risen in the past years. This is perceived to be the main cause of the increasing number of dissatisfied users. Since service to its customers has high priority, one of the objectives is to decrease the number of requests that cannot be satisfied by 50% within two years. For this to be possible, the library should be allowed to spend the available budget at its own discretion, rather than being triggered by signals from researchers only (this sounds radical, doesnt it). It is therefore decided to augment the existing automated system with modules to keep track of both successful and unsuccessful requests. Based on the insights gained from this measurement process during a period of three months, a decision will be taken as to how large a percentage of the annual budget will be reallocated.
Prototyping Given the fact that it is difficult, if not impossible, to build the right system from the start, we may decide to use prototypes. Starting from a first set of requirements, a prototype of the system is constructed. This prototype is used for experiments, which lead to new requirements and more insight into the possible uses of the system. In one or more ensuing steps, a more definite set of requirements is developed. Prototyping is discussed in section 3.2.1. Other agile processes follow a similar strategy in which requirements are quickly translated into a running system to be assessed by its users.
Of these requirements elicitation techniques, asking is the least certain strategy, while prototyping is the least uncertain. Besides the experience of both users and analysts, the uncertainty of the process is also influenced by the stability of the environment, the complexity of the product to be developed and the familiarity with the problem area in question. We may try to estimate the impact of those factors on the vulnerability of the resulting requirements specification, and then decide on a certain primary method for requirements elicitation based on this estimate.
For a well-understood problem, with very experienced analysts, interviewing the prospective users may suffice. However, if it concerns an advanced and ill-understood problem from within a rapidly changing environment and the analysts have little or no experience in the domain in question, it seems wise to follow an agile process.
Requirements uncertainty is not the only problem project managers have to cope with, and a different process is not the only solution they opt for. Political aspects (such as hidden agendas and conflicts between stakeholders) are often seen as larger risks than mere requirements uncertainty (Moynihan, 2000). Of course, these are related. In both cases chances are high that requirements will change. Project managers often follow a formal route to handle disagreements between stakeholders, and let the customers sign off the requirements document. Whether this is the answer in the long run is questionable, though.
As the uncertainty decreases, the beneficial effects of user participation in requirements engineering diminish. If the uncertainty increases, however, greater user participation does have a positive effect on the quality of requirements engineering.
It is generally wise to have multiple customer--developer links in a software development project, and during requirements engineering in particular. Keil and Carmel (1995) studied the relation between project success and the number and type of such customer--developer links. The authors observed a strong correlation between the number of links and project success: more links implied more successful projects. The relative contribution to project success diminishes as the number of links grows; there is no need to have more than, say, half a dozen links. A further interesting observation from this study is that links with direct users have more impact on project success than links with indirect users such as user representatives or sales people. Finally, it was noted that customer-driven development projects tend to use and prefer different types of link to market-driven development projects. For example, the favorite link for custom development -- facilitated teams -- was not used by package developers, while the favorite link for package developers -- support lines -- was seldom used for custom projects.
We should be very careful in our assessment of which requirements elicitation technique to choose. It is all too common to be too optimistic about our ability to properly assess software requirements.
As an example, consider the following anecdote from a Dutch newspaper. A firm in the business of farm automation had developed a system in which microchips were put in cows ears. Subsequently, each individual cow could be tracked: food and water supply was regulated and adjusted, the amount and quality of the milk automatically recorded and analyzed, etc. Quite naturally, this same technique was next successfully applied to pigs. Thereafter, it was tried on goats. A million-dollar, fully automated goat farm was built. But alas, things did not work out that well for goats. Contrary to cows and pigs, goats eat everything, including their companions chips.
9.1.3	Goals and Viewpoints
In this section we discuss two ways to structure a set of requirements. One way to do so is in a hierarchical structure: higher-level requirements are decomposed into lowerlevel ones. The high-level requirements are often termed goals. The other structuring method links requirements to specific stakeholders. For example, management may have a set of requirements, and the end-users may have (another) set of requirements. These different sets of requirements are called viewpoints. In both cases, elicitation and structuring go hand in hand.
For example, one of the requirements elicited for our library system could be that the system should allow users to search the database for a particular book. By asking ourselves or the stakeholders why this requirement is needed, a higher level requirement is detected, viz. the necessity for having search facilities. Again asking why, a high-level goal of serving the customers is arrived at. Going the other way, by asking how the library system may help serve the customers, a requirement to learn about user preferences and use this knowledge while interacting with the user, might emerge. In this way, by asking why and how questions, a hierarchical structure of goals and requirements develops. Figure 9.6 contains an example of such a hierarchical structure.
 
	Figure 9.6	Hierarchy of requirements
Figure 9.6 depicts a refinement structure, in which each requirement is refined (decomposed) into a set of subrequirements that together satisfy the parent requirement. The subrequirements are AND-related: search book and search news item together make up the search facilities requirement.
We may also include other types of relationships. For instance, we may have certain options for a particular requirement, and to that end have OR-relations next to AND-relations. We may also include other types of link. If we have a requirement to impose fines on customers who return items late, we may conceive this as conflicting with our goal of serving customers, and connect these two requirements by a link of type conflicts with.
This so-called goal-driven requirements engineering results in a graph connecting high-level goals to lower-level requirements. This graph can be reasoned about, e.g. to validate that certain goals are indeed reached, or to detect conflicts (Lamsweerde, 2001).
It is often useful to collect and organize requirements from different perspectives, or viewpoints. Different stakeholders may have different sets of requirements. Different quality concerns may also lead to different sets of requirements, leading for instance to a security viewpoint. The latter type of perspective is usually dealt with during software architecture design, and will be discussed in chapter 11. The techniques discussed in section 9.3 implicitly denote different viewpoints as well, such as a data viewpoint in the entity-relationship models. Here, we focus on different viewpoints caused by different stakeholders. These different viewpoints may be in conflict, and these conflicts need to be recognized and dealt with during requirements engineering.
The Computer Aided Dispatch System for The London Ambulance Service again provides a clear case of conflicting viewpoints: management wants an effective system, crew members want to get home within a reasonable time after their shift has ended (see also sections 1.4.3 and 9.1.1). For our library system, conflicts between stakeholders may likewise occur.
Consider, for example, the following issue which may crop up during the requirements elicitation phase for our library system. The system has to offer certain features to register and handle fines. An item not returned in time incurs a fine of, say, $0.25 per day. John, one of the library employees involved in the specification process, takes the following position (denoted Pos A in figure 9.7): members should be warned about outstanding fines at the earliest possible moment. His argument (Arg A) is that service is degraded if a member cannot borrow an item because some other member has not returned that item on time. Mary, the library manager, takes a rather different position (Pos B): members should not be warned about outstanding fines until the due-back date has expired one month. Her argument (Arg B) is that fines are a most welcome addition to the library budget, which is under severe pressure because of the continuing price increase of journal subscriptions.
This situation is graphically depicted in the graph in figure 9.7. The graph contains nodes of types issue, position and argument, and directed links of type response-to,
 
	Figure 9.7	Graph representation of conflicting viewpoints
taken-by and supports. Capturing this type of information in an automated system offers possibilities to store, trace and manipulate the very diverse types of information being gathered during the requirements engineering phase. An early system along these lines is gIBIS, a system designed to capture early design decisions.
Two viewpoints in particular are important during requirements engineering: the business viewpoint and the personal viewpoint. The business viewpoint is usually propagated by management stakeholders, while the personal viewpoint is usually propagated by end users. However, end users tend to also ascribe to business requirements, at least at an early stage. For instance, when John is asked whether fines are a welcome addition to the subsidy the library gets from the government, a likely answer is yes. This requirement is viewed as a requirement of the business, not a personal requirement of John. Only when he is confronted with the consequences, will he realize that this is after all not what he wants. And a request to change the system will follow.
9.1.4	Prioritizing Requirements
Our task is not to provide every button and pull-down menu enhancement that our customers ask for, but to invent a completely new way of working -- one that will thrill and amaze them.
(Robertson, 2002)
In most cases, not all requirements can be realized, so we have to make a selection. In section 3.2.3 we mentioned a very simple form of requirements prioritization called triage. A variant often used is known as MoSCoW (the os are just there to be able to pronounce the word). Usinig MoSCoW, we distinguish four types of requirement:
Must haves: these are the top priority requirements, the ones that definitely have to be realized in order to make the system acceptable to the customer.
Should haves: these requirements are not strictly mandatory, but they are highly desirable.
Could haves: if time allows, these requirements will be realized as well. In practice, they usually wont.
Wont haves: these requirements will not be realized in the present version. They are recorded though. They will be considered again for a next version of the system.
The MoSCoW scheme assumes that requirements can be ordered along a single axis, and that realizing more requirements yields more satisfied customers. Reality often is more complex. In the Kano model (Kano, 1993), user preferences are classified into five categories, as listed in figure 9.8. The way customers value the Attractive, Must-be and One-dimensional categories of requirements is depicted in figure 9.9. This figure shows that offering attractive, so called killer features, is what will really excite your customers. The above quote from Robertson (2002) points in the same direction: amaze your customer by giving him something he never even dreamt of.
In market-driven software development, the product often has a series of releases. The list of requirements for such products is usually derived from sales information, user logs from earlier versions of the system, and other sources of indirect information. One then has to decide which requirements to include in the current version, and which ones to postpone to a next one. Business case analysis, return on investment estimations, and similar economics-driven argumentations then are used to set priorities. This priority setting is to be repeated for each version, since user preferences may change, the market reacts, and the like.
Finally, the prioritization of requirements is related to the notion of scoping in software product lines. If we want to develop a series of similar library systems, we have to delimit the domain we intend to handle. A smaller domain, say only scientific libraries, is easier to realize, but has a smaller market. A set of products covering a larger domain is more difficult to realize, yet has the promise of larger sales and profits. Scoping is further discussed in chapter ??, in the context of our discussion of software product lines.
 
Attractive	The customer will be more satisfied if these requirements are met, but not les satisfied if they are not. For example, an automatic alert if new books of a beloved author arrive.
Must-be	The customer will be dissatisfied if these requirements are not met, but his satisfaction will never raise above neutral. An example is the ability to search the library catalog.
One-dimensional	For requirements of this category, satisfaction is proportional to how many of these requirements are being met. Alternative ways to search the library catalog could fall into this category.
Indifferent	The customer does not really care about these requirements. For example, the customer might not care whether different categories of library items are displayed in a different color on the screen.
Reverse	The customers judgement of the requirements is the opposite of what the analyst thought a priori. For example, the analyst may have thought the library customer would want the system to remember her search patterns so as to be able to serve her better next time, while the customer wants to start afresh each time.
Questionable	The customers preferences are not clear. She both seems to like and dislike a certain feature.
 
	Figure 9.8	Kanos requirements categories
9.1.5	COTS selection
Up till now, we dealt with a situation where the customer phrases her requirements, after which a system that satisfies these requirements is developed. With Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) software, the customer has to choose from what is available. In practice, the situation is not always that clear cut, and the COTS system may be extended or adapted to suit the customers needs. For our discussion, we assume it is a pure selection process.
COTS selection is an iterative process comprising the following steps:
1.	Define requirements. As in ordinary requirements elicitation processes, a list of requirements for the product is derived. Any of the elicitation techniques discussed above may be used in this process.
 
	Figure 9.9	The Kano diagram
2.	Select components. A set of components that can possibly handle the requirements posed is determined. This selection process may involve market research, internet browsing, and a variety of other techniques.
3.	Rank the components. The components are ranked in the order in which they satisfy the requirements.
4.	Select the most appropriate component, or iterate.
Often, the set of components and requirements are too large to make a complete analysis and ranking in one step feasible. An iterative process is then followed, whereby the most important requirements are used to make a first selection from the set of available components. In a next step, a larger list of requirements is assessed against a smaller set of components. And so on.
There are different ways to rank components. A straightforward method is the Weighted Scoring Method (WSM). Each requirement is given a weight, and the alternatives are given a score for each requirement, say on a scale from 1 to 5. In table 9.1, three components labeled A, B, and C are scored on three criteria: performance, supplier reputation, and functionality. In the example, components B and C score highest, and these might next be scrutinized further.
 
	Table 9.1	WSM example
 
A major drawback of WSM is that every criterion can be compensated for by any other criterion. In the example from table 9.1, component C makes it to the next round even though it scores very low on functionality. More complex ranking schemes, such as the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) overcome this drawback ((Saaty, 1990)).
9.2	Requirements Documentation and Management
The end-product of the requirements engineering phase in a document-driven development project is a requirements specification. The requirements specification is an a posteriori reconstruction of the results of this analysis phase. Its purpose is to communicate these results to others. It serves as an anchor point against which subsequent steps can be justified.
The requirements specification is the starting point for the next phase: design. Consequently, a very precise, even mathematical description is preferable. On the other hand, the specification must also be understandable to the user. This often means a readable document, using natural language and pictures. In practice, one has to look for a compromise. Alternatively, the requirements specification may be presented in different, but consistent, forms to the different audiences involved.
Besides readability and understandability, various other requirements for this document can be stated (IEEE830, 1993):
A requirements specification should be correct. There is no procedure to guarantee correctness. The requirements specification should be validated against other (superior) documents and the actual needs of the users to assess its correctness.
A requirements specification should be unambiguous, both to those who create it and to those who use it. We must be able to uniquely interpret requirements. Because of its very nature, this is difficult to realize in a natural language.
A requirements specification should be complete. All significant matters relating to functionality, performance, constraints, and the like, should be documented. The responses to both correct and incorrect input should be specified; phrases like to be determined are particularly insidious. Unfortunately, it is not always feasible to complete the specification at an early stage. If certain requirements can only be made specific at a later stage, the requirements specification should at least document the ultimate point in time at which this should have happened.
A requirements specification should be (internally) consistent, i.e. different parts of it should not be in conflict with each other. Conflicting requirements can be both logical and temporal. Using different terms for one and the same object may also lead to conflicts.
Requirements should be ranked for importance or stability. Typically, some requirements are more important than others. In some cases, a simple ranking scheme like essential, worthwhile, and optional will suffice; in other cases, a more sophisticated classification scheme may be needed (see also section 9.1.4). We may indicate the stability of requirements by indicating the likelihood, or the expected number, of changes. Through the explicit incorporation of this type of information in the requirements document, users are stimulated to give more consideration to each requirement. It also gives developers the opportunity to better direct their attention.
A requirements specification should be verifiable. This means that there must be a finite process to determine whether or not the requirements have been met. Phrases like the system should be user-friendly are not verifiable. Likewise, the use of quantities that cannot be measured, as in the systems response time should usually be less than two seconds, should be avoided. A requirement like for requests of type X, the systems response time is less than two seconds in 80% of cases, with a maximum machine load of Y, is verifiable.
A requirements specification should be modifiable. Software models part of reality. Therefore it changes. The corresponding requirements specification has to evolve together with the reality being modeled. Thus, the document must be organized in such a way that changes can be accommodated readily (a tabular or database format, for example). Redundancy must be prevented as much as possible, for otherwise there is the danger that changes lead to inconsistencies.
A requirements specification should be traceable. The origin and rationale of each and every requirement must be traceable. A clear and consistent numbering scheme makes it possible that other documents can uniquely refer to parts of the requirements specification.
As a guideline for the contents of a requirements specification we will follow IEEE Standard 830. This standard does not give a rigid form for the requirements specification. In our opinion, the precise ordering and contents of the elements of this document also is less essential. The important point is to choose a structure which adheres to the above constraints. In IEEE Standard 830, a global structure such as depicted in figure 9.10, is used.
 
	1.	Introduction
1.1 Purpose
1.2 Scope
1.3 Definitions, acronyms and abbreviations
1.4 References
1.5 Overview
	2.	Overall description
2.1 Product perspective
2.2 Product functions
2.3 User characteristics
2.4 Constraints
2.5 Assumptions and dependencies
2.6 Requirements subsets
	3.	Specific requirements
 
Figure 9.10 Global structure of the requirements specification (Source: IEEE Recommended Practice for Software Requirements Specifications, IEEE Std 830, 1993. Reproduced by permission of IEEE.)
For any nontrivial system, the detailed requirements will constitute by far the largest part of the requirements document. It is therefore helpful to somehow categorize these detailed requirements. This can be done along different dimensions, such as:
Mode. Systems may behave differently depending on the mode of operation, such as training or operational. For example, performance or interface requirements may differ between modes.
User class. Different functionality may be offered to different classes of users, such as library members and library personnel.
Objects. Requirements may be classified according to the objects (real-world entities) concerned. This classification scheme is a natural one when used in conjunction with an object-oriented analysis technique (see section 12.3).
Response. Some systems are best described by placing together functions in support of the generation of a response, for example functions associated with catalog queries or library member status information.
Functional hierarchy. When no other classification fits, some functional hierarchy, for example organized by common inputs, may be used.
As an example, figure 9.11 gives a refinement of the section on specific requirements along the dimension of user classes,
 
3.	Specific requirements
3.1	External interface requirements
3.1.1	User interfaces
3.1.2	Hardware interfaces
3.1.3	Software interfaces
3.1.4	Communications interfaces
3.2	Functional requirements
3.2.1	User class 1
3.2.1.1	Functional requirement 1.1
3.2.1.2	Functional requirement 1.2 . . .
3.2.2	User class 2 . . .
3.3	Performance requirements
3.4	Design constraints
3.5	Software system attributes
3.6	Other requirements
 
Figure 9.11 Prototype outline of the section on Specific Requirements (Source: IEEE Recommended Practice for Software Requirements Specifications, IEEE Std 830-1993. Reproduced by permission of IEEE.)
A further clarification of the various components is given in Appendix ??. As an example, figure 9.12 contains (part of) a possible requirements specification for the library example mentioned earlier, following the IEEE guidelines. Start of figure 9.12
1.	Introduction.
1.1	Purpose. This document states the requirements of an automated library system for a medium-sized library of a research institute. The requirements stated serve as a basis for the acceptance procedure of this system. The document is also intended as a starting point for the design phase.
1.2	Scope. The intended product automates the library functions described in DOC1. Its purpose is to provide a more effective service to the library users, in particular through the online search facilities offered. More details of the performance requirements are given in section 3.3 of this document. Once this system is installed, the incorporation of new titles will go from an average of 15 minutes down to an average of 5 minutes.
1.3	Definitions,acronymsandabbreviations. Library member: . . . , Library personnel: . . . , User: The term user may refer to both library members and library personnel, and is used to denote either class of users. Title catalog: . . . , PICA: . . . , etc.
1.4	References. DOC1: . . . , DOC2: . . . , etc.
1.5	Overview. Section 2 of this document gives a general overview of the system. Section 3 gives more specific requirements for functions offered. These functions are categorized according to the class of users they support: (external) members of the library and library personnel, respectively.
2.	Overall description.
2.1	Product perspective. The already installed database system X will be used to store the various catalogs as well as the library member administration. There are no interfaces to other systems. The system will be realized on the Y configuration. The maximum external storage capacity for the catalogs of the system is 1500 MB. Library personnel will use a barcode reader to enter member, book and journal identifications. The interface protocol to the barcode reader is described in DOC4.
2.2	Product functions. The system provides two types of function:
	Functions by which users may search the catalogs of books and journal articles. A list of these functions is given in DOC1. A more detailed description is given in section 3.2.1.
	Functions by which library personnel may update the administration of borrowed titles and the systems catalogs; see section 3.2.2.
The user of the system selects one of the functions offered through the main menu (section 3.2.1.1 and 3.2.2.1).
2.3	User characteristics. The library members are incidental users of the system and have little knowledge of automated systems of this kind. The system therefore has to be self-instructing. Specific requirements are formulated in sections 3.1.1 and 3.3. The library personnel will be trained in the use of the system; see section 3.1.1.
2.4	Constraints. Library members may only search the catalogs of books and journal articles; they are not allowed to update a catalog or the user administration. The latter functionality is to be offered through a dedicated, password-protected interface only.
2.5	Assumptions and dependencies. . . .
2.6	Requirements subsets. . . .
3.	Specific requirements.
3.1	External interface requirements.
3.1.1	User interfaces. The screen formats for the different features are specified in Appendix A. Appendix B lists the mapping of commands to function keys. The user can get online help at any point by giving the appropriate command. Appendix C contains a list of typical usage scenarios. These usage scenarios will be used as acceptance criteria: 80% of the users must be able to go through them within ten minutes. An instruction session for library personnel should take at most two hours.
3.1.2	Hardware interfaces. The user interface is screen-oriented. The system uses up to ten function keys.
3.1.3	Software interfaces. The interface with database system X is described in DOC2.
3.1.4	Communications interfaces. Not applicable.
3.2	Functional requirements.
3.2.1	Library member functions.
3.2.1.1	Select member feature. The user selects one of the options from the main menu. Subsequent actions are described in sections 3.2.1.2 and 3.2.1.3.
At any point, the user has an option to return to the main menu (see Appendix B).
3.2.1.2	Search book catalog. Given (part of) a book title or author name, the user may search the book catalog for titles that match the input given. The user is offered a screen with two fill-in-the-blank areas (one for the title and one for the author), one of which is to be filled in.
Input. The input may contain both upper and lower case letters. Special symbols allowed are listed in DOC1. Any other glyphs entered are discarded and are not shown on the screen. The input is considered complete when the processing command is issued.
Processing. All lower case letters are turned into upper case letters. The string thus obtained is used when querying the database. A database entry matches the title string given if the transformed input is a substring of the title field of the entry. The same holds for the author field if (part of) an author name is input.
Output. A list of titles that match the input is displayed. Up to four titles are shown on the screen. The user may traverse the list of titles found using the screen scrolling commands provided. A warning is issued if no title matches the input given.
3.2.1.3	Search article catalog. . . .
3.2.2	Library personnel functions.
3.2.2.1	Selectpersonnelfeature. Through a dedicated, password-protected interface, library personnel are offered an extended main menu, listing the options available to all users, as well as the options available to library personnel only. The latter are described in sections 3.2.2.2 and 3.2.2.3.
3.2.2.2	Borrow title. . . .
3.2.2.3	Modify catalog. . . .
3.3	Performance requirements. The system will initially support 32 concurrent access points. Its maximum capacity is 128 concurrent access points.
The present database holds 25 000 book titles and 500 journal subscriptions. The storage capacity needed for these data is 300 MB. On average 1000 books and 2000 journal issues enter the library per year. The average journal issue has six articles. This requires a storage capacity of 15 MB per year.
The system must be able to serve 20 users simultaneously. With this maximum load and a database size of 450 MB, user queries as listed in sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 must be answered within five seconds in 80% of the cases.
3.4	Design constraints.
3.4.1	Standards compliance. Title descriptions must be stored in PICA-format. This format is described in DOC3.
3.4.2	Hardware limitations. See section 2.1.
3.5	Software system attributes.
3.5.1	Availability. During normal office hours (9 am--5 pm) the system must be available 95% of the time. A backup of the system is made every day at 5 pm.
3.5.2	Security. The functions described in section 3.2.2 are restricted to library employees and password-protected. . . .
3.5.3	Maintainability. . . .
3.6	Other requirements. . . .
The IEEE framework for the requirements specification is especially appropriate in document-driven models for the software development process: the waterfall model Figure 9.12	Partly worked-out requirements specification for the library example
End figure 9.12
and its variants. When a prototyping technique is used to determine the user interface, the IEEE framework can be used to describe the outcome of that prototyping process. The framework assumes a model in which the result of the requirements engineering process is unambiguous and complete. Though it is stated that requirements should be ranked for importance, and requirements that may be delayed until future versions may be included as subsets, this does not imply that a layered view of the system can be readily derived from a requirements document drawn up this way.
Irrespective of the format chosen for representing requirements, the success of a product strongly depends upon the degree to which the desired system is properly described during the requirements engineering phase. Small slips in the requirements specification may necessitate large changes in the final software. Software is not continuous, as we noted earlier.
The importance of a solid requirements specification cannot be stressed often enough. In some cases, up to 95% of the code of large systems has had to be rewritten in order to adhere to the ultimate user requirements.
	9.2.1	Requirements Management
A fundamental problem with the IEEE framework discussed above is that it describes the end product only. Before this final stage is reached, the current set of requirements is in a constant state of flux. And even after the requirements phase is ended, requirements will change and new requirements will be put forth. The latter phenomenon is known as requirements creep, and is the cause for many run-away projects.
Changes in requirements cannot be circumvented. In many cases, it is not wise to aim for an early freeze of the requirements either. In general, the preferred situation is as depicted in figure 9.13: in the course of time, the set of requirements becomes more and more stable.
Obviously, this evolving set of requirements has to be managed. Requirements management involves three activities:
	requirements identification,
	requirements change management, and
	requirements traceability.
Each requirement has to have a unique identification. The simplest form is to just number them. If there is a hierarchical organization, as in a goal-hierarchy, such can be reflected in the numbering scheme. Since requirements are often changed and updated, it is expedient to include versioning information as well. Finally, we may
 
	Figure 9.13	Requirements stability over time
add some attributes to each requirement, such as its status, priority, main stakeholder involved, and the like. Requirements engineering tools usually have means to store requirements in a structured repository.
Changes to requirements have to be properly managed. By viewing each requirement as a configuration item, the rules and procedures from configuration management (chapter 4) can be applied.
We may connect requirements to solution elements such as design elements or even software components that realize those requirements. In this way, we establish traceability from requirements to code and vice versa. This allows us to trace where requirements are realized (forward traceability), and why certain solutions are chosen (backward traceability). Traceability information is important in all development phases. It can be used to answer a variety of questions, such as:
	where is this requirement implemented?
	do we need this requirement?
	are all requirements linked to solution elements?
	which requirement does this test case cover?
	what is the impact of this requirement?
	do we need this design element (piece of code)?
This way of making the relation between requirements and solutions explicit is closely related to design space analysis. In design space analysis, the aim is to explicitly model all possible combinations of requirements and solutions. Design space analysis originated in the field of human-computer interaction. A well-known notation for Design Space Analysis is known as QOC (Questions, Options and Criteria). Questions correspond to requirements, Options are the possible answers to those requirements, and Criteria refer to the reasoning for choosing a particular option. For instance, we may display the result of a news query of a library customer (the question) either sorted by date of publication, or by author name (the options). The criterion for using either order could be the source of the news item: sort newspaper articles by date, and journal articles by author name.
On one hand, design space analysis results in a rich structure in which an extensive record is built up of the rationale for a specific solution. Why is this system built the way it is? Which alternatives did we consider but reject? Which requirements survived the tradeoffs we had to make? On the other hand, capturing all this information is expensive, and the immediate benefits are difficult to prove, if at all. This is a main reason why design rationale by and large failed to transfer to practice.
	9.3	Requirements Specification Techniques
The document that is produced during requirements engineering -- the requirements specification -- serves two groups of people. For the user, the requirements specification is a clear and precise description of the functionality that the system has to offer. For the designer, it is the starting point for the design. It is not easy to serve both groups with one and the same document.
The user is in general best served by a document which speaks his language, the language that is used within the application domain. In the example used before, this would result in using terms like title description and catalog.
The designer on the other hand, is best served with a language in which concepts from his world are used. In terms of the library example, he may prefer concepts like records (an instance of which might be termed title description) or files. In one sense, this boils down to a difference in language. However, this difference is of fundamental importance with respect to the later use of the systems description.
If the system is described in the users language, the requirements specification is mostly phrased in some natural language. If we try to somewhat formalize this description, we may end up with a technique in which certain forms have to be filled in or certain drawing techniques have to be applied.
If, on the other hand, the expert language of the software engineer plays a central role, we often use some formal language. A requirements specification phrased in such a formal language may be checked using formal techniques, for instance with regard to consistency and completeness.
 
9.3. REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION TECHNIQUES
In practice, an outspoken prevalence for the users expert language shows itself. We may then use existing concepts from the environment in which the system is going to be used. Admittedly, these concepts are not sharply defined, but in general there are no misconceptions between the experts in the application domain as regards the meaning of those concepts. A description in terms of those concepts can thus still be very precise. Since the first goal of the requirements specification is to get a complete description of the problem to be solved, the users expert language then would be the best language for the requirements specification.
However, there are certain drawbacks attached to the use of natural language. Meyer (1985) gives an example which illustrates very well what may go wrong when natural language is used in a requirements specification. Meyer lists seven sins which may beset the analyst when using natural language:
Noise This refers to the presence of text elements that do not contain information relevant to the problem. Variants hereof are redundancy and regret. Redundancy occurs when things are repeated. Since natural language is very flexible, related matters can easily be phrased in completely different ways. When this happens the cohesion between matters gets blurred. Regret occurs when statements are reversed or shaded. In the library example, for instance, we could have used the phrase a list of all books written by author D several times and only then realize that this list may be empty, necessitating some special reaction from the system.
Silence Silence occurs when aspects that are of importance for a proper solution of the problem, are not mentioned. An example of this was that the need for two variants on an authors name was not stated explicitly.
Over-specification This occurs when elements of a requirements specification correspond to aspects of a possible solution, rather than to aspects of the problem. As an example, we could have specified that books be kept sorted by the first authors name. Over-specification limits the solution space for the designer.
Contradictions If the description of one and the same aspect is given more than once, in different words, contradictions may occur. This risk is especially threatening when one tries to be too literary. A requirements specification is not meant to be a novel.
Ambiguity Natural language allows for more than one meaning for one and the same phrase. Ambiguity can easily occur when terms are used that belong to the jargon of one or both parties. A book may both denote a physical object and a more abstract entity of which several instantiations (copies) may exist.
Forward references References to aspects of the problem that are only defined later on in the text. This especially occurs in large documents that lack a clear structure. Natural language in itself does not enforce a clear structure.
Wishful thinking A description of aspects of the system such that a realistic solution will be hard to find.
A possible alternative given by Meyer is to first describe and analyze the problem using some formal notation and then translate it back into natural language. The natural language description thus obtained will in general represent a more precise notion of the problem. And it is readable to the user. Obviously, both these models must now be kept up-to-date.
Quite a number of techniques and accompanying notations have evolved to support the requirements engineering process. Most often, the representation generated is a set of semantic networks. Each such representation has various types of nodes and links between nodes, distinguished by visual clues such as their shape or natural language labels. Nodes typically represent things like processes, stores, objects, and attributes. Nodes are joined by arrows representing relationships such as data flow, control flow, abstraction, part-whole, or is-part-of.
Typical examples of such techniques and their representations are discussed in chapter 10. Entity--Relationship Modeling (section 10.1.1) is a widely-known technique to model the data aspect of an information system. Finite State Machines (section 10.1.2) can be viewed as a technique to model the functional aspect. They have a much wider applicability though, and constitute a basic underlying mechanism for many modeling techniques. In particular, the Unified Modeling Language (UML) owes tribute to them. UML diagrams (section 10.3) are widely used to model the result of both requirements engineering and design. Section 9.3.1 touches upon the issue of how to specify non-functional requirements.
	9.3.1	Specifying Non-Functional Requirements
The IEEE framework depicted in figure 9.11 lists four types of non-functional requirements: external interface requirements, performance requirements, design constraints and software system attributes. These non-functional requirements can be viewed as constraints placed upon the development process or the products to be delivered.
External interface requirements and design constraints are generally phrased in terms of (non-negotiable) obligations to be met. They are dictated at the start of the project and often concern matters which surpass an individual development project. Examples of such requirements include:
	hardware, software and communications interfaces to be complied with;
	user interfaces that have to obey company standards;
	report formats to be adhered to;
	process constraints such as ISO 9000 compliance or a prescribed development method;
9.4. VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION
	hardware limitations caused by the available infrastructure.
The remaining non-functional requirements are also known as quality requirements. Quality requirements are notoriously difficult to specify and verify. This topic is dealt with extensively in chapter 6. At this point, we merely wish to re-emphasize two essential issues: quality requirements should be expressed in objective, measurable terms and perfection incurs infinite cost.
Like all other requirements, quality requirements should be verifiable. Requirements such as the system should be flexible, the system should be user-friendly, or response times should be fast, can never be verified and should not therefore appear in the requirements specification. Other phraseology can be used such as for activities of type A the system should have a maximum response time of one second in 80% of the cases, while a maximum response time of three seconds is allowed in the remaining 20% of the cases.
Conversely, extreme levels of quality requirements, such as zero defects or response times of less than 1 second in 100% of the cases, generally incur extremely high costs, or are not feasible at all. Given the fact that users find it difficult to express their true requirements, they may be inclined to ask for too much where quality requirements are concerned, just to be on the safe side. To the analyst and developers, it is likewise difficult to assess the feasibility of those requirements. How can we be sure about response times before even one line of code has been written?
Consider the following example of what may and may not be technically feasible. Suppose we have an application in which two kinds of transactions may occur. Those transactions are characterized by their frequency, CPU-time needed and the number of physical I/O transports. The average I/O access time is also given. Using a statistical distribution describing the dynamics of these systems, one may then answer questions such as: how much capacity should the CPU have in order to achieve a response time of at most 2 seconds in X% of cases? Some given configuration may satisfy the constraints for the case X = 80. A somewhat more stringent requirement (X = 90) may require doubling the CPU-capacity. An even more severe requirement (X = 95) might well not be achievable by the range of machines available.
At first sight, the differences between these requirements seem marginal. They turn out to have a tremendous effect, though. An early and careful analysis of the technical feasibility may yield surprising answers to a number of important questions. Usually, this type of analysis is done at software architecture time. There are many examples of projects in which lots of money was spent on software development efforts which turned out to be not practically feasible (Baber, 1982).
9.4	Verification and Validation
In chapter 1, we argued that a careful study of the correctness of the decisions made at each stage is a critical success factor. This means that during requirements engineering we should already start verifying and validating the decisions laid down in the requirements specification.
The requirements specification should reflect the mutual understanding of the problem to be solved by the prospective users and the development organization: has everything been described, and has it been described properly. Validating the requirements thus means checking them for properties like correctness, completeness, ambiguity, and internal and external consistency. Of necessity, this involves user participation in the validation process. They are the owners of the problem and they are the only ones to decide whether the requirements specification adequately describes their problem.
If the requirements specification itself is expressed in a formal language, the syntax and semantics of that representation can be verified through formal means. However, the requirements specification can never be completely validated in a formal way, simply because the point of departure of requirements engineering is informal. Most of the testing techniques applied at this stage are therefore informal as well. They are meant to ascertain that the parties involved have the same, proper understanding of the problem. A major stumbling block to this stage is ensuring the user understands the contents of the requirements specification. The techniques applied at this stage often resolve to a translation of the requirements into a form palatable to user inspection: natural-language paraphrasing, the discussion of possible usage scenarios, prototyping, and animation.
Besides testing the requirements specification itself, we also generate at this stage the test plan to be used during system or acceptance testing. A test plan is a document prescribing the scope, approach, resources, and schedule of the testing activities. It identifies the items and features to be tested, the testing tasks to be performed, and the personnel responsible for these tasks. We may at this point develop such a plan for the system testing stage, i.e. the stage at which the development organization tests the complete system against its requirements. Acceptance testing is similar, but is performed under supervision of the user organization. Acceptance testing is meant to determine whether or not the users accept the system.
A more elaborate treatment of the various verification and validation techniques will be given in chapter 13.
	9.5	Summary
During requirements engineering we try to get a complete and clear description of the problem to be solved and the constraints that must be satisfied by any solution to that problem. During this phase, we do not only consider the functions to be delivered, but we also pay attention to requirements imposed by the environment. The requirements engineering phase results in a series of models concentrating on different aspects of the system (such as its functionality, user interface and communication structure) and different perspectives (audiences). The result of this process is documented in a requirements specification. A good framework for the contents of the requirements
9.5. SUMMARY
specification is given in (IEEE830, 1993). It should be kept in mind that this document contains an a posteriori reconstruction of an as yet ill-understood iterative process. This iterative process involves four types of activity:
	requirements elicitation, which is about understanding the problem,
	requirements specification, which is about describing the problem,
	requirements validation, which is about agreeing upon the problem, and
	requirements negotiation, which is about fitting the problem to the situation at hand.
In many cases, fully completing requirements engineering before design and construction start is not feasible. In agile development processes, requirements engineering is intertwined with design and construction.
During requirements engineering we are modeling part of reality. The part of reality we are interested in is referred to as the universe of discourse (UoD). The modeling process is termed conceptual modeling.
People involved in a UoD have an implicit conceptual model of that UoD. During conceptual modeling, an implicit model is turned into an explicit one. The explicit conceptual model is used to communicate with other people, such as users and designers, and to assess the validity of the system under development during all subsequent phases. During the modeling process, the analyst is confronted with two types of problem: analysis problems and negotiation problems. Analysis problems have to do with getting the requirements right. Negotiation problems arise because different people involved may have different views on the UoD to be modeled, opposing interests, and so on.
Existing approaches to requirements engineering are largely Taylorian in nature. They fit a functional view of software development in which the requirements engineering phase serves to elicit the real user requirements. It is increasingly being recognized that the Taylorian approach need not be the most appropriate approach to requirements engineering. Many UoDs under consideration involve people whose world model is incomplete, irrational, or in conflict with the world view of others. In such cases, the analyst is not a passive outside observer of the UoD, but actively participates in shaping the UoD. The analyst gets involved in negotiation problems and has to choose the view of some party involved, or assist in obtaining some compromise.
The following description techniques are often used for the requirements specification:
	natural language,
	pictures, and 	formal language.
An advantage of using natural language is that the specification is very readable and understandable to the user and other non-professionals involved. Pictures may be put to advantage in bringing across the functional architecture of the system. A formal language allows us to use tools in analyzing the requirements. Because of its precision, it is a good starting point for the design phase. We may also argue that both formal and informal notations be used, since they augment and complement each other. For each of the parties involved, a notation should be chosen that is appropriate to the task at hand.
	9.6	Further Reading
There are many text books fully devoted to requirements engineering. Davis (1993) provides a fairly complete coverage of classic requirements specification techniques. Davis (2005) focuses on requirements engineering in the face of tight schedule constraints. Wieringa (1996) discusses a number of requirements specification techniques in quite some depth. The distinction between implicit and explicit conceptual models is made there too. Loucopoulos and Karakostas (1995) and Kotonya and Sommerville (1997) have a stronger emphasis on the full requirements engineering process. Juristo et al. (2002) discuss the state of the practice in requirements engineering. Hofman and Lehner (2001) focus on successful requirements practices. Sommerville (2005) discusses recent developments in the field.
Pohl (1993) and Goguen and Jirotka (1994) emphasize the role of social and cognitive issues in requirements engineering. Ramos et al. (2005) argue that emotion is relevant in requirements engineering. The thin spread of application knowledge amongst the specialists involved is discussed in (Curtis et al., 1988). Difficulties of requirements engineering for market-driven software development are addressed in (Potts, 1993). Moynihan (2000) discusses how managers cope with requirements uncertainty.
The objectivist--subjectivist and order--conflict dimensions and the resulting four paradigms for requirements engineering are discussed in (Hirschheim and Klein, 1989). Various socio-technical, subjectivist, approaches to requirements elicitation are discussed in (Atkinson, 2000).
Task analysis is discussed in (Sebillotte, 1988). Scenario-based requirements engineering techniques are discussed in (Weidenhaupt et al., 1998) and (TrSE, 1998). Sutcliffe et al. (1998) describe how to create and document scenarios during requirements engineering. Business Process Redesign is described in (Keen, 1991) and (Tapscott and Caston, 1993). A framework for BPR is given in (Davenport, 1993).
Research in requirements elicitation is aimed at developing techniques which overcome our limitations as humans in conveying information. An early overview of this type of problem is given in (Davis, 1982). A more recent survey and evaluation of elicitation techniques is given in (Goguen and Linde, 1993). Example experience reports are given in (Sommerville et al., 1994) and (Coakes and Coakes,
9.6. FURTHER READING
2000) (ethnographic approach) and (Beyer and Holtzblatt, 1995) (the analyst as an apprentice to the user).
Lamsweerde (2001) gives a very good overview of goal-oriented requirements engineering. Mylopoulos et al. (2001) is another article by pioneers in this area. Darke and Shanks (1996) and Sommerville and Sawyer (1997) provide a good overview of viewpoints in the context of requirements engineering.
Leffingwell and Widrig (2000) is fully devoted to requirements management. One of the first discussions of requirements traceability is (Gotel and Finkelstein, 1994). Design space analysis is discussed in (Moran and Carroll, 1994). Questions, Options, Criteria (QOC) stem from (MacLean et al., 1991). gIBIS, a hypertext system designed to capture early design decisions, is described in (Conklin and Begeman, 1988).
Kanos model is discussed in (Kano, 1993). The quest for creativity in requirements engineering is further stressed in (Robertson, 2002), Austin and Devin (2003) and (Maiden et al., 2004).
Morisio et al. (2002) gives a taxonomy of COTS products. COTS selection procedures are discussed in (Maiden and Ncube, 1998).
Exercises
1.	What are the four major types of activity in requirements engineering?
2.	What is requirements elicitation?
3.	What is the difference between an implicit and an explicit conceptual model?
4.	In what sense are most requirements engineering techniques Taylorian in nature?
5.	Describe the requirements elicitation technique called task analysis.
6.	Describe the requirements elicitation technique called scenario-based analysis.
7.	In	which	circumstances	is	ethnography	a	viable	requirements	elicitation technique?
8.	What is goal-oriented requirements engineering?
9.	How can conflicting requirements be represented in viewpoints?
10.	What does MoSCoW stand for?
11.	Why is the distinction between Attractive, Must-be and One-dimensional categories of requirements in Kanos model relevant?
12.	How does the presence of COTS components affect requirements engineering?
13.	Why is requirements traceability important?
14.	List and discuss the major quality requirements for a requirements document.
15.	List and discuss major drawbacks of using natural language for specifying requirements.
16.	Draw up a requirements specification for a system whose development you have been involved with, following IEEE 830. Discuss the major differences between the original specification and the one you wrote.
17.	What are major differences in the external environment of an office automation system and that of an embedded system, like an elevator control system. What impact will these differences have on the requirements elicitation techniques to be employed?
18.	For an office information system, identify different types of stakeholders. Can you think of ways in which the requirements of these stakeholders might conflict?
19.	Refine the framework in figure 9.1 such that it reflects the situation in which we have to explicitly model both the current and the new work situation.
20.	Discuss pros and cons of the following descriptive means for a requirements specification: full natural language, constrained natural language, a pictorial language like UML.
21.	Which of the descriptive means mentioned in the previous exercise would you favor for describing the requirements of an office automation system? And which one for an elevator control system?
22.	Take the requirements specification document from a project you have been involved in and assess it with respect to the requirements for such a document as listed in section 9.2 (unambiguity, completeness, etc.).
23.	How would you test the requirements stated in the document from the previous exercise? Are the requirements testable to start with?
24.	How would you go about determining the requirements for a hypertext-like browsing system for a technical library. Both users and staff of the library only have experience with keyword-based retrieval systems.
25.	As an analyst involved in the development of this hypertext browsing
9.6. FURTHER READING
system, discuss possible stands in the subjectivist--objectivist and order-conflict dimensions. What are the arguments for and against these stands?
26.	Write a requirements specification for a hypertext browsing system.
27.	Study the following specification for a simple line formatter:
The programs input is a stream of characters whose end is signaled with a special end-of-text character, ET. There is exactly one ET character in each input stream. Characters are classified as:
	break characters -- BL (blank) and NL (new line);
	nonbreak characters -- all others except ET; 	the end-of-text indicator - ET.
A word is a non-empty sequence of nonbreak characters. A break is a sequence of one or more break characters. Thus, the input can be viewed as a sequence of words separated by breaks, with possible leading and trailing breaks, and ending with ET.
The programs output should be the same sequence of words as in the input, with the exception that an oversize word (i.e. a word containing more than MAXPOS characters, where MAXPOS is a positive integer) should cause an error exit from the program (i.e. a variable, Alarm, should have the value TRUE). Up to the point of an error, the programs output should have the following properties:
1	A new line should start only between words and at the beginning of the output text, if any.
2	A break in the input is reduced to a single break character in the output.
3	As many words as possible should be placed on each line (i.e. between successive NL characters).
4	No line may contain more than MAXPOS characters (words and BLs).
Identify as many trouble spots as you can in this specification. Compare your findings with those in (Meyer, 1985).
28.	What are the major uses of a requirements specification. In what ways do these different uses affect the style and contents of a requirements document?
 
10 Modeling
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To know about various classic modeling techniques
To know about UML, the Unified Modeling Language, and its main diagram types
To know the terminology of object orientation
In the course of a software development project, and most notably during requirements engineering and design, many modeling notations are used. These range from very informal sketches of system functions or screen layout, to highly formal descriptions of system behaviour. The most common notations used are box-and-line diagrams with semi-formal semantics. In this chapter we discuss a number of these diagrammatic notations.
During software development, a lot of communication takes place. This communication is supported by all kinds of notations to convey its message. A sketch of some screen layout may support the communication between a user and a requirements engineer. A much more formal description of class interfaces may support the communication between a designer and a developer.
The most common notations used to support communication between the various stakeholders involved in software development use some sort of box-and-line diagrams. Sometimes, these diagrams have very informal semantics. For instance, the boxes may denote parts of the system, where it is not clear what exactly a part is. One box may denote a major subsystem, another box may denote the set of security measures taken. Likewise, lines may denote a parts-of relation, a calling relation, a uses relation, and so on. While being drawn, these loose semantics may not be a problem. But the next day, confusion will arise.
An alternative is to use diagrams that do have a more precise semantics. If the readers know these semantics, there need not be any confusion of what exactly is meant. If the semantics are precise enough, the diagrams can be subjected to all kinds of consistency checks. Tools may generate the diagrams, read them, and possibly even generate executable code from the diagrams. And finally, we may link the diagrams to the methods that generate them, thereby giving some operationalization to their construction process. For instance, the steps in a design method can be linked to the steps for generating the corresponding diagram. The latter kinds of diagrams are discussed in chapter 12, together with a discussion of the corresponding design methods.
In this chapter, we discuss a number of semi-formal modeling notations. Most of them use some sort of box-and-line diagram. Some use a more textual layout. The diagrams and schema are usually drawn during requirements engineering and design. Some primarily serve requirements engineering. For instance, use case diagrams are usually drawn during requirements engineering. Jackson structure diagrams on the other hand are mostly used during design. Many modeling notations serve both.
Currently, the mainstream modeling notations stem from UML -- the Unified Modeling Language. Many diagrams from UML, though, are based on or derived from earlier ones. And, certainly in legacy applications, you may come across many of these older notations. Therefore, a sample of both is provided in this chapter.
UML evolved from some of the mainstream object-oriented analysis and design methods. The concept of object orientation in turn has its roots in the development of programming languages, most notably SIMULA-67 and Smalltalk. With respect to analysis and design (and requirements analysis), object orientation is best viewed by highlighting the differences with more traditional design methods such as functional decomposition and dataflow design. Whereas traditional techniques focus on identifying the functions that the system is to perform, object-oriented methods focus on identifying and interrelating the objects that play a role in the system. Section 10.2 introduces a number of relevant concepts, such as object, attribute, class, relationship. In one way or another, these concepts show up in many UML diagram types.
	10.1	Classic Modeling Techniques
We discuss four classic modeling techniques that have been around for quite a while:
Entity--Relationship Modeling (ERM) is a data modeling technique, pioneered by Chen in the seventies. UML class diagrams are based on ERM.
Finite State Machines (FSM) are used to model states and state transitions. In the early days, certain types of formal languages, as for instance used in compilers, were modeled as finite state machines. UML state machine diagrams are based on finite state machines.
Data Flow Diagrams (DFD) model a system as a set of processes and data flows that connect these processes. It is the notation used in data flow design. DFDs resemble the UML sequence diagram.
CRC cards are a simple requirements elicitation tool. Much of the information collected on CRC cards can also be represented in UML communication diagrams.
Many other classic modeling notations exist. Many of these are tied to a certain analysis or design method. We will discuss some of them in chapter 12 in the context of a discussion of design methods. The ones discussed here are relatively method-independent.
	10.1.1	Entity--Relationship Modeling
In data-intensive systems, modeling the (structure of) the data is an important concern. Until the 1970s, data modeling techniques very much mixed up implementation concerns with concerns arising from the logical structure of the UoD. For example, the book catalog would be modeled as a table containing tuples (records) with alphanumeric fields containing the title and author, and numeric fields containing the publication year and number of pages.
Entity--relationship modeling (ERM), as pioneered by Chen, is directed at modeling the logical, semantic structure of the UoD, rather than its realization in some database system. Entity relationship models are depicted in entity--relationship
 
diagrams (ERDs). There are many variants of ERM, which differ in their graphical notations and extensions to Chens original approach. The basic ingredients of ERM are given in figure 10.1.
 
entity	distinguishable object of some type entity type	type of a set of entities attribute value	piece of information (partially) describing an entity
attribute	type of a set of attribute values relationship	association between two or more entities
 
	Figure 10.1	ERM concepts and their meaning
An entity is a thing that can be uniquely identified. Entities are usually depicted in an ERD as rectangles. Example entities are:
	tangible objects, such as copies of a book, identified by some number;
	intangible objects, such as books identified by their ISBN, or members of some organizational construct, such as library employees identified by their employee number.
Entities have properties known as attributes. For example, some library employee may have the name Jones. Here, Jones is the value of the attribute called name. Attributes are usually depicted as circles or ellipses.
Both entities and attribute values have a type. As modelers, we tend to view a type as a set of properties shared by its instances. As implementors, we tend to view a type as a set of values with a number of associated operations. For the attribute number of books on loan, the set of values could be the set 0 .. 10 with operations such as increment and decrement. For the entity type book copy, candidate operations would be borrow, return, and so on.
Entities are linked through relationships. For example, the relationship borrow involves the entities book copy and library member. Most often, a relationship is binary, i.e. it links two entities. A relationship is denoted by a diamond linked to the entities involved.
Entity--relationship models impose restrictions on the cardinality of relationships. In its simplest form, the relationships are 1--1, 1--N, or N--M. The relationship borrow is 1--N: a copy of a book can be borrowed by one member only, while a member may have borrowed more than one book copy. In an ERD, these cardinality constraints are often indicated by small adornments of the arrows linking the entities.
An example entity--relationship diagram is given in figure 10.2. Cardinality constraints have been indicated by explicitly indicating the set of possibilities. Thus, this ERD states that a book copy can be borrowed by at most one member, and a member may borrow up to 10 book copies.
 
	Figure 10.2	An entity--relationship diagram
An entity--relationship model can be obtained using any of the elicitation techniques discussed before. In particular, form analysis and analysis of natural language descriptions are often used. Since ERMs tell only part of the story, additional techniques have to be employed to model other aspects. Many Structured Analysis techniques, for example, incorporate ERM to model the data aspect.
Entity--relationship modeling is a natural outgrowth of database modeling. Originally, ERM was intended to model the logical structure of data, rather than the logical structure of the UoD. In heuristics on how to obtain a good entity-relationship model, these roots are still visible. For example, some of these heuristics resemble normalization constraints from database theory. This may explain why some do not commend entity--relationship modeling as a requirements specification technique (see, e.g. (Davis, 1993)).
Present-day ERM has a lot in common with object-oriented analysis techniques. For example, subtype--supertype relations between entity types are included in many ERM-techniques. Conversely, the class diagram of UML (see section 10.3.1) includes many elements from ERM.
	10.1.2	Finite State Machines
At any one point in time, our library is in one of a (vast) number of possible states. The state of the library can be expressed in terms of things like:
	the collection of titles available,
	the collection of titles ordered but not yet received,
	the collection of library members,
	the balance of the account from which acquisitions are paid.
Any action occurring in the library, be it the return of a book or the appointment of a new employee, transforms the current state into a new state .
Requirements specification techniques which model a system in terms of states and transitions between states are called state-based modeling techniques. A simple yet powerful formalism for specifying states and state transitions is the Finite State Machine (FSM). An FSM consists of a finite number of states and a set of transitions from one state to another that occur on input signals from a finite set of possible stimuli. The initial state is a specially designated state from which the machine starts. Usually, one or more states are designated as final states. Pictorially, FSMs are represented as state transition diagrams (STD). In a state transition diagram, states are represented as bubbles with a label identifying the state, and transitions are indicated as labeled arcs from one state to another, where the label denotes the stimulus which triggers the transition. Figure 10.3 gives an FSM depicting the possible states of a book copy and the transitions between those states. The final state is the one labeled written off. Any of the others could be designated as the initial state.
 
	Figure 10.3	A state transition diagram
Figure 10.3 models only a tiny part of the library system. It does not describe the complete state of the system in any one bubble, nor does it depict all possible state transitions. Modeling a system in one, large and monolithic, STD is not to be recommended. Such a structure soon becomes unwieldy and difficult to understand. Though we could model the system in a series of FSMs, we would still have the problem of how to integrate these into one model.
A possible way out is to allow for a hierarchical decomposition of FSMs. This is the essence of a notation known as statecharts. In statecharts, groups of states can be viewed as a single entity at one level, to be refined at the next level of abstraction. In UML, FSMs are modeled in the state machine diagram (section 10.3.2).
	10.1.3	Data Flow Diagrams (DFD)
The data flow design method originated in the early 1970s with Yourdon and Constantine. In its simplest form, data flow design is but a functional decomposition with respect to the flow of data. A component (module) is a black box which transforms some input stream into some output stream. The main notation used is that of Data Flow Diagrams (DFD).
Four types of data entity are distinguished in a data flow diagram:
External entities are the source or destination of a transaction. These entities are located outside the domain considered in the data flow diagram. External entities are indicated as squares.
Processes transform data. Processes are denoted by circles.
Data flows between processes, external entities and data stores. A data flow is indicated by an arrow. Data flows are paths along which data structures travel.
Data stores lie between two processes. This is indicated by the name of the data store between two parallel lines. Data stores are places where data structures are stored until needed.
Data flow diagrams result from a top-down decomposition process. The process at the highest level has one process only, denoting the system. Next, this top-level diagram is further decomposed. For our library example, this could lead to the data flow diagram of figure 10.4. A client request is first analyzed in a process labeled preliminary processing. As a result, one of borrow title or return title is activated. Both these processes update a data store labeled catalog administration. Client requests are logged in a data store log file. This data store is used to produce management reports.
The design method mostly used in conjunction with data flow diagrams is discussed in section 12.2.2. There, we will also give more example data flow diagrams.
	10.1.4	CRC Cards
CRC stands for Class -- Responsibility -- Collaborators. A CRC card is simply a 4 6 or 5 7 index card with three fields labeled Class, Responsibility and
 
	Figure 10.4	Data flow diagram for library automation
Collaborators. CRC cards were developed in response to a need to document collaborative design decisions. CRC cards are especially helpful in the early phases of software development, to help identify components, discuss design issues in multidisciplinary teams, and specify components informally. CRC cards may be termed a low-tech tool, as opposed to the high-tech tools we commonly use. Yet they are highly useful. They are also fun to work with in our all-too-serious business meetings.
CRC cards are not only used in collaborative design sessions. Within the design pattern community, for instance, they are used to document the elements that participate in a pattern.
The word class in CRC is a historical relic. CRC cards can be used to describe any design element. We will stick to the original terminology, however. The class name appears in the upper-left corner of the card. A bullet-list of responsibilities appears under the class name and a list of collaborators appears on the right part of the card.
 	 
 	
	Figure 10.5	A CRC card
Figure 10.5 gives an example of a CRC card for a component Reservations in our library system. The main responsibilities of this component are to keep an up-to-date list of reservations and to handle reservations on a FIFO basis. Its collaborators are the catalog component and the user session component. The types of interaction with these components is shown in figure 10.16.
	10.2	On Objects and Related Stuff
What matters is not how closely we model todays reality but how extensible and reusable our software is.
(Meyer, 1996)
The world around us is full of objects, animate and inanimate, concrete and abstract: trees and tables, cars and legal cases. According to some, analysis and design is about modeling those real-world objects. By and large, this view has its origins in the Scandinavian school of programming language design (SIMULA-67) and software development. It may be termed the European view. According to others, analysis and design is about identifying reusable components and building their inheritance hierarchy. This latter view, which may be termed the American view, clearly shows itself in the above citation.
What then is an object? As might be expected, there are different views of what the notion of object entails. We may distinguish the following viewpoints:
 
The modeling viewpoint: an object is a conceptual model of some part of a real or imaginary world. This is termed the European view. From this point of view, important characteristics are:
	each object has an identity, which distinguishes it from all other objects;
	objects have substance: properties that hold and can be discovered by investigating an object.
From a practical point of view, object identity is an immutable tag, or an address, which uniquely identifies that object. Different objects occupy different regions of memory. Pragmatically also, objects may be regarded as implementations of abstract data types (ADTs). An object then consists of a mutable state, i.e. the set of variables of the ADT, and operations to modify or inspect the state. Typically, the only way to access an object is through these operations. These operations thus act as an interface to the object. An object then is a collection of three aspects:
	object = identity	variables	operations
or
	object = identity	state	behavior
The philosophical viewpoint: objects are existential abstractions, as opposed to universal abstractions. In some circles (notably Smalltalk), everything is an object. In this view, objects act as a unifying notion underlying all computation. However, one may also argue that there are two rather distinct types of abstraction. Some kinds of entity have a natural beginning and end. They are created at some point in time, exist for a while, and are ultimately destroyed. The kinds of entities modeled as objects during analysis and design typically belong to this class. Other kinds of entities, such as numbers, dates and colors, have eternal existence. They are not instantiated; they cannot be changed; they live forever. These entities are usually referred to as values.
The software engineering viewpoint: objects are data abstractions, encapsulating data as well as operations on those data. This viewpoint stresses locality of information and representation independence; see also sections 12.1.1 and 12.1.3. However, not all programming languages enforce data abstraction, and objects need not always encapsulate an abstract data type. We might claim that data abstraction and objects are somewhat orthogonal, independent dimensions.
A programming language that merely allows us to encapsulate abstract data types in modules is often termed object-based. The adjective object-oriented then is reserved for languages that also support inheritance. Inheritance is discussed below.
The implementation viewpoint: an object is a contiguous structure in memory. Technically, an object may be regarded as a record of data and code elements. An object may be composite or aggregate, in which case it possesses other objects. These sub-objects in turn may possess even smaller sub-objects, etcetera. The lowest-level objects in this hierarchy are atomic objects, typically denoting things like integers, real numbers or Booleans.
The implementation of this possessed-by relation appears to be intricate. On the one hand, objects may be contained in other objects. In this representation, all references are dispensed with. There is no concept of sharing. This scheme is known as value semantics. Value semantics is inadequate for object-oriented systems, since such systems require sharable objects. The opposite scheme is reference semantics: data is represented as either an atomic object or as an aggregate of references to other objects. Pure reference semantics is inefficient in the case of primitive objects like integers or characters. A combination in which aggregate objects may contain other objects, refer to other objects, or do both at the same time, is commonly used as a storage scheme. The choice of a particular storage model is to some extent reflected in the high-level language semantics (for example, where it concerns copying or comparing objects).
The formal viewpoint: an object is a state machine with a finite set of states and a finite set of state functions. These state functions map old states and inputs to new states and outputs.
Formalization of the concepts and constructions of object-oriented languages is difficult. Mathematical formalisms tend to be value-based. Imperative concepts, such as state and sharing, that are central to object-oriented languages do not fit easily within such schemes.
During analysis, the conceptual viewpoint is usually stressed. Those who are of the opinion that analysis and design smoothly shade off into one another tend to keep this view during design. Others however are of the opinion that analysis and design are different, irrespective of whether they are object-oriented or not. They are likely to stress other viewpoints during design. The definition of an object as given in (Coad and Yourdon, 1991) also reflects the tension between a problem-oriented and a solution-oriented viewpoint: an object is an abstraction of something in a problem domain, reflecting the capabilities of a system to keep information about it, interact with it, or both; an encapsulation of Attribute values and their exclusive Services. We will come back to this dichotomy when discussing object-oriented methods in section 12.3.
As noted above, objects are characterized by a set of attributes (properties). A table has legs, a table top, size, color, etc. The attribute concept originates with Entity--Relationship Modeling; see section 10.1.1. In ERM, attributes represent intrinsic properties of entities, properties whose value does not depend on other entities. Attributes denote identifying and descriptive properties, such as name or weight.
Relationships on the other hand denote mutual properties, such as an employee being assigned to a project or a book being borrowed by a member. In UML, these relationships are called associations. In UML, the distinction between attributes and relationships formally does not exist. Both are properties of a class. It is considered good practice in UML though to model simple properties as attributes, and more complex properties as associations.
In the context of object-oriented modeling, the term attribute is sometimes used to denote any field in the underlying data structure. In that case, the objects identity is an attribute, the state denotes the set of structural attributes, and the operations denote the behavioral attributes. We will use the term attribute to denote a structural attribute. Collectively, this set of attributes of an object thus constitutes its state. It includes the intrinsic properties, usually represented as values, as well as the mutual properties, usually represented as references to other objects.
At the programming-language level, objects that have the same set of attributes are said to belong to the same class. Individual objects of a class are called instances of that class. So we may have a class Table, with instances MyTable and YourTable. These instances have the same attributes, with possibly different values.
An object not only encapsulates its state, but also its behavior, i.e. the way in which it acts upon other objects and is acted upon by other objects. The behavior of an object is described in terms of services provided by that object. These services are invoked by sending messages from the object that requests the service to the object that is acted upon.
In order for a collection of objects to operate together as intended, each of the objects must be able to rely on the proper operation of the objects with which it interacts. In a client-server view, one object, the client, requests some service from another object, the server. This mutual dependency may be viewed as a contract between the objects involved. The client will not ask more than what is stated in the contract, while the server promises to deliver what is stated in the contract. In this perspective, services are also referred to as responsibilities.
The major behavioral aspect of an object concerns state changes. The state of an object instance is not static, but changes over time: the object instance is created, updated, and eventually destroyed. Also, certain information may be requested from an object. This information may concern the state of the object instance, but it may also involve a computation of some sort.
For example, a customer of a library may have attributes like Name, Address, and BooksOnLoan. It must be possible to create an instance of the object type Customer. When doing so, suitable values for its attributes must be provided. Once the instance has been created, state changes are possible: books are loaned and returned, the customer changes address, etc. Finally, the instance is destroyed when the customer ceases to be a member. Information requested may concern such things as a list of books on loan or the number of books on loan. The former is part of the state that describes a particular customer and can be retrieved directly from that state. NumberOfBooksOnLoan is a service that requires a computation of some sort, for example counting the number of elements in BooksOnLoan.
We will generally not be concerned with individual objects. Our goal is to identify and relate the object types (i.e. classes). We will often use the term object to denote an object type. One of our major concerns during analysis and design is to identify this set of objects, together with their attributes (state) and services (behavior).
Relations between objects can be expressed in a classification structure. The major types of relation depicted in such structures are listed in figure 10.6.
Relation	Example
Specialization/Generalization, is-a	Table is-a Furniture
Whole-part, has	Table has TableTop
Member-of, has	Library has Member
	Figure 10.6	Major types of relations between objects
If we have objects Table and Chair, we may also define a more general object Furniture. Table and Chair are said to be specializations of Furniture, while Furniture is a generalization of Table and Chair. These relations are also known as is-a relations. The is-a relation is a well-known concept from Entity--Relationship Modeling.
The generalization/specialization relations can be expressed in a hierarchical structure like the one in figure 10.7. In its most general form the classification structure is a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Many classification structures can be depicted as a tree though, in which case each object is a direct descendant of exactly one other object. At the programming-language level, single inheritance corresponds to a tree structure, while multiple inheritance corresponds to a DAG.
Different objects may share some of their attributes. Both tables and chairs have a height, for instance. Rather than defining the full set of attributes for each object, we may define common attributes at a higher level in the object hierarchy and let descendants inherit those attributes. We may therefore define the attribute Height at the level of Furniture rather than at the level of each of its descendants. Obviously, this is just another way of looking at the object hierarchy. The fact that Chair and Table are both descendants of Furniture already suggests that they share certain properties, properties that are common to the various types of furniture. The fact that they are different descendants of Furniture also suggests that they each have unique properties.
Alternatively, we may view the object hierarchy as a type hierarchy. Chair and Table are subtypes of Furniture, just like Cardinal is a subtype of Integer. In this view, an object is a restriction of the objects of which it is a specialization. Each chair is a piece of furniture, but the reverse is not generally true.
 
	Figure 10.7	Object hierarchy
By explicitly relating objects in the object hierarchy, a much tighter semantic binding between related objects is realized than is possible in more traditional design approaches. In a functional decomposition of our library automation problem for example, there is virtually no way to make the similarities between books and journals explicit in the design. In an object-oriented design, objects Book and Journal can be made descendants of a more general object Publication, and attributes like Publisher can be inherited from this more general type of object.
The is-a relation is one way to organize (object) types into a hierarchy. The part-of relation is another major organizational property of object types. A Table has a TableTop and Legs. A Publication has a TitleDescription and a Publisher. This part-of relation aggregates components into a whole. It describes how compound things are made up of simpler things. By definition, the compound is at a higher level of abstraction than its components.
An object like TableTop is made up of attributes, for example Color, Width and Length. At the next level, objects like TableTop and Legs are assembled into a higher-level object, viz. Table. At that level, we may introduce additional attributes, such as Size, so that Table may also be seen as an aggregate of the first kind. In general, a compound object consists of a number of (references to) other objects and a number of simple attributes, i.e. values.
In the case of Table, the part-of relation is a real-world part-of relation. In the case of Publication, Publisher does not correspond to some part of the underlying real-world object. It merely is part of the representation of the object Publication. Sometimes, an explicit distinction is made between the real-world part-of relation and the representational part-of (or component-of) relation. In UML they are called composition and aggregation, respectively.
In many modeling methods, the part-of relation subsumes the member-of relation. The member-of relation is used to model the relationship between a set and its members. It is, however, sometimes useful to be able to distinguish between these organizational properties. For example, the part-of relation is generally considered to be transitive, whereas the member-of relation is not. If Book is a member of Library, and Library is a member of PublicInstitutions, we do not want to infer that Book is a member of PublicInstitutions.
	10.3	The Unified Modeling Language
The Unified Modeling Language has its roots in the object-oriented analysis and design methods of the 1980s. Several key players in this field (Grady Booch, John Rumbaugh and Ivar Jacobson) came to work for Rational, and started to unify their methods and notations. This resulted in the first versions of UML. At a later stage, OMG --- the Object Management Group, an open consortium of companies --- took over. They now control the activities around UML, and adopted it as one of their standards. The current version is known as UML 2. UML is by far the most widely used notation for both requirements engineering and design.
The 13 diagrams of UML 2 are listed in figure 10.8. Some diagrams, such as the class diagram and the state machine diagram, have been there since the beginning of object orientation. Others are more recent. For example, the composite structure diagram and the timing diagram were introduced in UML 2. Some of the diagrams give a static view. For instance, a class diagram shows the static structure of a system. Other diagrams give a dynamic, or behavioral view, i.e. they show what happens when the system is executed. For instance, a sequence diagram shows which messages are exchanged between instances of classes. In figure 10.8, static diagrams are marked with an S, and dynamic diagrams are marked with a D. In the next subsections, we discuss the most important UML diagrams.
	10.3.1	The Class Diagram
Class diagrams depict the static structure of a system. A class diagram is a graph in which the nodes are objects (classes) and the edges are relationships between
 
Diagram	Description
Activity (D)	To model business processes, workflow, procedural logic. Similar to flowcharts, but activity diagrams support parallelism, like in Petri nets
Class (S)	To model classes, their features and relationships. See section 10.3.1
Communication (D)	To model the flow of messages between instances of classes. Very similar to the sequence diagram.
See section 10.3.4
Component (S)	To model a set of components and their interrelationships (through interfaces). See section 10.3.5
Composite structure	To model the internal dynamic structure of a class
Deployment	To model the physical layout, i.e. the assignment of system elements to hardware elements
Interaction overview (S)	Combines activity diagrams and sequence diagrams
Object (S)	To model objects and their relationships at some point in time; also known as instance diagram
Package (S)	To model the grouping of elements into packages
Sequence (D)	To model the order in which messages are exchanged between instances of classes. See section 10.3.3
State machine (D)	To model the states in which an object can be, and the transition between states. See section 10.3.2
Timing (D)	To model state changes of an object over time
Use case (D)	To model use cases. See section 10.3.6
	Figure 10.8	UML 2 diagram types
objects. By decorating the edges, many kinds of relationships can be modeled. These relationships fall into two classes: generalizations and associations.
The most common example of a generalization-type class diagram is a diagram depicting the subclass--superclass hierarchy. Figure 10.7 is an example of such a class diagram. The classes are denoted by rectangles that have three compartments. These compartments contain, from top to bottom:
	the name of the class, 	the list of attributes of the class, and 	the list of operations of the class.
UML allows for quite some variety in its notation. We may for instance depict a class as a rectangle with one compartment only, just giving the name of the class. Adding slightly more detail, we may depict a class as a rectangle having two compartments, where the second one characterizes the responsibilities of that class, i.e., what it is supposed to do, as kind of an inline comment. Figure 10.9 gives the three-compartment representation in which a number of analysis-level details have been added. We may even extend the notation further and add implementation-level details, such as whether attributes and operations are public or private. We may think of these different representations as different views of the same model element. We may envision tool support that allows the user to switch from one representation to another, suppressing or adding detail as the need arises.
 
	Figure 10.9	UML class diagram: generalization
The hollow triangle in figure 10.9 indicates that the structure is a generalization/specialization structure. Generalization is shown as a solid path from the more specific element (such as Book) to the more general element (Publication), with a large hollow triangle at the end of the path. A group of generalization paths may be shown as a tree with a shared segment, as in figure 10.9.
The attributes of a class denote properties of that class. E.g., publisher is a property of Publication. Next to attributes, UML has another way of denoting properties of a class, viz. associations. A UML association is depicted as a solid line connecting two classes. This line may be adorned with a variety of glyphs and textual information to provide further specifics of the relationship. A simple association between a library and its clients is depicted in figure 10.10a. The (optional) name of the association is printed near the path. The solid triangle indicates the direction in which the verb is to be read. Note that associations are bi-directional: a client is a member of a library, and a library has members. Further adornments can be added to indicate properties of the association. In figure 10.10a we have added multiplicity information: a client can be a member of one or more libraries, while a library may have zero or more clients.
Strictly speaking, there is no difference between an attribute and an association. In figure 10.10b, we have depicted Client as an attribute of Library. Usually, simple properties such as numbers and dates are modeled as attributes, while more significant concepts are modeled as associations.
An association such as Member-of also has class properties. For example, this association has attributes, e.g. MemberId, and operations, such as BecomeMember and CeaseToBeMember. Alternatively, we may say that class Membership has association properties. In UML, this model element is termed association class. It can be depicted as a class symbol attached by a dashed line to an association path, as in figure 10.10c. We may even promote an association clas to a full class, as in figuUML10.10d. Notice that the multiplicities have moved. A membership (of a client) can be to one or more libraries, whereas the membership (of the library) relates to zero or more clients.
The part-of relation is called aggregation or composition in UML. In an aggregation, objects can be part of more than one other object. For example, if our library maintains lists of required readings for certain courses, then a given book may be a part of more than one required reading list. Aggregation is denoted with an open filed diamond as association role adornment. Composition is a strong notion of aggregation, in which the part object may belong to only one whole object. With composition, the parts are expected to live and die with the whole. If a table is composed of four legs and a tabletop, the table owns these parts. They cannot be part of another table at the same time. Composition is denoted by a solid filled diamond as an association role adornment, as in figure 10.11a. Figure 10.11a shows a Book with parts title, author, and isbn. A book has one title and one ISBN, so these parts have multiplicity 1. We assume here that a book may have up to three authors, so that part has multiplicity of 1..3. At the whole end of composition, the multiplicity is either 1 or 0..1. This part-of relationship is a relationship between a class and the classes of its attributes. An alternative notation for this part-of relation therefore consists of the top two compartments of the diagram for a class, as in figure 10.11b.
Next to generalization and association, there are many other ways in which elements of a class diagram may depend on each other. For example, one class may call operations from another class, create instances of another class, and so on. Such
Library	*	 	Is-member-of 1..*	Client
		
a)
Library
Client: Clientinfo [*]

b)
 
 
Figure 10.10 UML class diagram: (a) association, (b) association as attribute, (c) association class, (d) association class as a full class
dependencies are depicted with a dashed arrow, labeled with the type of dependency. If all dependencies are included in a class diagram, it soon becomes very cluttered. So it is wise to only include important dependencies. Many types of dependencies need not be modeled by hand, but can be derived from the source code, and tools exist that do so.
An abstract class is a class that cannot be instantiated directly. Only its (concrete) clients can. Abstract classes typically occur in hierarchies of data types. For instance, we may have an abstract class List, with subclasses like LinkedList and ArrayList.
 
 	
 
 

Figure 10.11	UML class diagram: composition as (a) association role adornment and (b) a simple class diagram
The abstract class List may have abstract operations as well, such as get, that can only be made concrete at the subclass level. At the level of List, we then merely state that each of its subclasses will provide an implementation of get. In our library example, we could have designated Publication as an abstract class. Abstract classes are indicated by printing their name in italics.
An interface is a class all of whose features are abstract. It has no implementation. Interfaces are a useful means to split the set of properties of a class into subsets, in case other classes only need access to subsets of those properties. For instance, class Publication may have properties that are accessible to customers of the library, as well as properties that are for internal use only, such as its price, who authorized acquisition, and so on. We may then define two interfaces to Publication that are made available to different other classes in the system. Publication then provides different interfaces to different client classes, who in turn require the interface. Interfaces are marked with the keyword interface , as in figure 10.12. Interfaces are often used to increase the robustness of a model, by restricting access to properties really needed.
10.3.2	The State Machine Diagram
A major class of services provided by an object relates to the objects life cycle: an object instance is created, updated zero or more times, and finally destroyed. State transition diagrams, which depict the possible states of an object and the transitions between those states, are a good help in modeling this life cycle.
 
	Figure 10.12	UML class diagram: interfaces
Usually, the finite state machine model and its associated state transition diagram (see section 10.1.2) are extended in several ways when used in modeling the behavior of objects over time:
In the classical finite state machine model, states do not have local variables. All necessary information is coded in the state. This easily leads to unwieldy models. For instance, suppose we want to model an object LibraryMember as follows: a person may become a member of the library, borrow up to 10 books, and cease to be a member of the library. This leads to a finite state machine with states like has-borrowed-0-books, has-borrowed-1-book, has-borrowed-2-books, . . . , has-borrowed-10-books. If the number of books on loan could be modeled as a local variable, the number of states in the model would be reduced from 12 to 2.
For this reason, the finite state machine is usually extended by adding local variables to the model. A state in this extended finite state machine then comprises both the explicit state represented by a node in the state transition diagram and the value of the models variables.
These local variables are not only used to decrease the number of states. State transitions may now also change the values of variables; the variables may be tested to determine the next state and transitions may be guarded by the value of the variables. In figure 10.13, the number of books on loan is kept in the local variable . This variable is initialized to zero, updated when a book is borrowed or returned, and tested when a person terminates his membership.
The components being modeled interact with the environment: there are input events and output actions. In all modeling methods that we know of, input events trigger transitions. When a person becomes a member of the library, this triggers the initial transition; when she borrows a book, it triggers a transition from a state, say, has-borrowed-7-books to a state has-borrowed-8-books. If the model has local variables, the latter state transition may result in a change in the value of such a local variable. In figure 10.13, the input events are denoted as strings that label state transitions (like Start and Borrow).
Different modeling methods have different ways to handle output actions. Sometimes, output actions are associated with a transition (this is known as a Mealy machine), sometimes output actions are associated with a state (a Moore machine). In the latter case, the output action is carried out as soon as the state is entered. In a formal sense, Mealy machines and Moore machines have the same expressive power.
Finite state diagrams may become unwieldy. Therefore, one may add some structure, through a hierarchy. Part of the model may be compressed into one state. If we are interested in the details of a state, we may zoom in on that state.
Many modeling methods, including UML, depict the sequence of states that an object goes through in a variant of the statechart. Statecharts are extended finite state machines (i.e. they have local variables) in which output actions may be associated with both transitions and states and in which states can be arranged hierarchically. In UML, this type of diagram is called state machine diagram.
 
	Figure 10.13	UML state machine diagram: object Member
As with class diagrams, UML has a rich notation for state diagrams. We will illustrate the major ingredients through a few examples; see also figures 10.13 and 10.14.
A state is some condition in the life of an object. It is shown as a rectangle with rounded corners. An initial (pseudo) state is shown as a small filled circle. This initial state is a mere notational device; an object can not be in such a state. It indicates the transition to the first real state. A final (pseudo) state is shown as a small circle surrounding a small filled circle. This final state is also a notational device. A transition is shown as a solid arrow from one state to another. When a change of state occurs, that transition is said to fire. A transition has a label that comes in three parts. The general form is trigger-signature [guard]/activity. All three parts are optional. The triggersignature denotes the event which triggers the transaction, such as the borrowing of a book. The event may be guarded by a Boolean expression. For example, the transition from state is-member to cleaning-up in figure 10.13 is guarded by the expression  ; it can only occur if the number of books on loan is zero. When an event occurs, only one transition can be taken. So if multiple transitions occur with the same event, the guards must be mutually exclusive. The transition label may include a procedural expression after the symbol /. This procedural expression is executed when the transition fires.
Figure 10.14 gives an example of nested states. Figure 10.14a gives a global view of the life cycle of an object Book: a book is ordered, stays alive for a while, and is eventually either disposed of or archived. In figure 10.14b, state alive is expanded to show its finer structure. In this example, the state is refined into mutually exclusive disjoint substates: a book is either available or borrowed . The transition from state ordered to state alive is drawn to the boundary of state alive. This is equivalent to a transition to the initial state within the graphics region of alive. The transition from the nested state available to states disposed and archived is made directly. To indicate this transition from a suppressed internal state of alive to disposed and archived in figure 10.14a, the transitions are not drawn from the boundary of alive, but from a so-called stub, shown as a small vertical line drawn inside its boundary.
	10.3.3	The Sequence Diagram
Objects communicate by sending messages. To carry out a certain task, a particular sequence of messages may have to be exchanged between two or more objects. The time ordering in which this sequence of messages has to occur may be depicted in a sequence diagram. A sequence diagram is on type of interaction diagram. A second type of interaction diagram is the communication diagram, discussed in
 
Figure 10.14 UML state diagram: object Book, (a) global view and (b) expanded view
section 10.3.4. In the telecommunications domain, sequence diagrams are known as Message Sequence Charts and provide a standard notation for designing and specifying protocols. The sequence diagram is also used in the design pattern community, to graphically depict the interaction between two or more objects participating in a design pattern.
In a sequence diagram, the horizontal dimension shows the various objects that participate in the interaction. An object is shown as a vertical dashed line, its lifeline. The period in which the object is active (within the particular sequence of messages depicted) is shown as a thin rectangle. If the distinction between active and inactive is not important, the entire lifeline may be shown as an activation, as in figure 10.15. The ordering in which the objects are shown carries no meaning.
The vertical dimension denotes the time sequencing of messages. Usually, only the order in which messages are displayed carries meaning. For real-time applications, the time axis may show actual numerical values.
Messages are shown as labeled arcs from one object to another. The vertical arrangement of messages indicates their order. The labels may also contain sequence numbers, which are particularly useful to indicate concurrency. A message may also be labeled with a guard, a boolean expression that states the condition which must hold for the message to be sent.
 
	Figure 10.15	UML sequence diagram: reserving a title
Figure 10.15 shows a possible sequence of interactions between a user, a catalog of available books, and an object which handles reservations. The first message comes from an outside, unknown source. This message is called the found message. The user then sends a request to the catalog to look up a certain title. The catalog reacts by sending data about that title to the user. If the title is not available (this is indicated by a boolean expression, the guard, within square brackets), a request to reserve that title is sent to the object that handles reservations. Some time later, that title will become available again and reservations will be notified. The object reservations will then send a message to the catalog to hold that book and will notify the user that the title is now available. The ordering of those two messages is irrelevant, so they carry the same sequence number. The user may now borrow the title and the corresponding reservation will be removed.
Again, UML has a rich notational vocabulary for sequence diagrams. It is possible to distinguish asynchronous message-passing from synchronous message-passing, to indicate iteration, to show the creation and destruction of objects, and so on. The main purpose of the sequence diagram however remains the same: an easy-to-read overview of the passing of messages in a particular interaction sequence.
10.3.4	The Communication Diagram
The communication diagram is another way to show one possible scenario for the interaction between a number of related objects. A communication diagram is a directed graph where the nodes denote entities and the edges denote communication between those entities.
 
	Figure 10.16	UML communication diagram: reserving a title
Figure 10.16 shows the same sequence of interactions as the scenario depicted in the sequence diagram in figure 10.15. Communication diagrams emphasize the objects and their relationships relevant to a particular interaction. To provide more detail about the interaction, relevant attributes may be shown inside the nodes (by adding another compartment as in a class diagram) and these attributes may be incorporated in the labels of the edges as well.
Sequence diagrams emphasize the ordering of messages. In a sequence diagram, sequence numbers are optional; in a communication diagram, they are mandatory since the ordering does not show itself graphically.
	10.3.5	The Component Diagram
When designing larger systems, it may be useful to be able to identify entities larger than a single class. Such can be done in a component diagram. In software architecture descriptions, for instance, the component diagram is a good way to depict a module view of a system (see section 11.3).
In essence, a component diagram is a class diagram with the stereotype component . In UML 1, the component diagram had a special form. In UML 2, this form is often depicted as a small component icon inside the component, as is done in figure 10.17. Other than this icon, the component diagram does not introduce any new notation.
 
	Figure 10.17	UML component diagram
Components contain classes, or other components. In figure 10.17 we have modeled Publication as a component containing two classes, called Searching and Storage. Components are connected by interfaces. Figure 10.12 uses the so-called ball-and-socket notation to depict interfaces. Both this notation and the one used in figure 10.17 are allowed in both class diagrams and component diagrams.
10.3.6	The Use Case
One possible requirements elicitation technique is scenario-based analysis; see also chapter 9. A scenario is a story which tells how a specific task instance is executed. Often, different scenarios are variations on the same theme. For instance, one scenario may describe the ordinary borrowing of a book, another one may describe borrowing a book when there are still outstanding fines, and so on. A set of scenarios having the same user goal, in this case borrowing, is called a use case.
A use case can be documented in various ways: as narrative text, formally using pre- and postconditions, for example, or graphically as in a state transition diagram. The use case diagram provides an overview of a set of use cases. Each use case is shown as an ellipse with the name of the use case. The use cases are enclosed by a rectangle denoting the system boundary. An actor that initiates or participates in a scenario is shown as a stick figure with the name of the actor below. Figure 10.18 shows part of the use case diagram for our library system. Borrowing a book involves two actors: a client and an employee of the library. Many other use cases will involve those two actors as well. The ordering of a new book needs approval of a supervisor, as does the remittance of a fine.
 
	Figure 10.18	UML use case diagram
	10.4	Summary
During requirements engineering and design, a variety of modeling notations are being applied. Most of these use some sort of box-and-line diagram. The mainstream modeling notations of today stem from UML --- the Unified Modeling Language. Many UML diagrams in turn are based on or derived from earlier types of diagram. In this chapter, we discuss a selection of classic modeling notations as well as the major UML diagram types.
The classic modeling notations discussed are:
Entity-Relationship Modeling (ERM), used to model the structure of data.
Finite State Machines (FSM), to model states and state transitions of a system.
Data Flow Diagrams (DFD) to model functional decomposition with respect to data.
CRC Cards, a simple notation to document collaborative design decisions.
UML evolved from earlier object-oriented analysis and design methods. Concepts used in UML, such as object, attribute, class, relationship, originate in the field of object orientation. UML 2 offers 13 diagram types. These fall into two classes. Some diagrams give a static view of the system. For instance, a class diagram shows how a system is statically organized into classes. Other diagrams give a dynamic view. For instance, a sequence diagram shows the time ordering of message exchanges between instance of classes.
	10.5	Further Reading
Entity--relationship modeling was pioneered by Chen (Chen, 1976). Many texts on database modeling include an elaborate discussion of ERM; see for example (Batini et al., 1992). Statecharts are described in (Harel, 1988). CRC cards are described in (Beck and Cunningham, 1989).
The different views of the notion of object are discussed in (Taivalsaari, 1993). The various meanings of attribute and related notions such as aggregate, part and member are discussed in (Motschnig-Pitrik, 1996). (Wegner, 1992) is a classic paper on the various dimensions of object-oriented modeling.
Fowler (2004) provides a good introduction to UML. UML is extensively discussed in two books by its creators: (Booch et al., 1999) and (Rumbaugh et al., 1999).
Exercises
1. Explain the following concepts from entity--relationship modeling: entity, entity type, attribute value, attribute, relationship.
 
10.5. FURTHER READING
2.	Define the following terms: object, state, attribute, message, and inheritance.
3.	Explain the difference between the specialization--generalization relation and the whole--part relation.
4.	Explain the difference between a class diagram and a state machine diagram.
5.	Explain the difference between a sequence diagram and a communication diagram.
6.	Explain the difference between a class diagram and a component diagram.
7.	What are CRC cards and use-case scenarios used for in object-oriented analysis and design?
8.	In what respects does a UML state diagram differ from a state transition diagram?
9.	In what sense can the interface to a class be considered a contract? What are the repercussions of this for subtyping relations? (See (Meyer, 1992)).
11
Software Architecture
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To appreciate the role of software architecture in software development
To understand the relation between software architecture and design decisions
To be able to document a software architecture in different views
To be able to characterize some important software architectural styles
To understand the role and purpose of software architecture assessments
Software architecture concerns the large-scale structure of software systems. This large-scale structure reflects the early, essential design decisions. This decision process involves negotiating and balancing of functional and quality requirements on one hand, and possible solutions on the other hand. Software architecture is not a phase strictly following requirements engineering, but the two are intertwined. In this chapter, we discuss how to design, document and evaluate software architectures.
A good design is the key to a successful product. Almost 2000 years ago, the Roman architect Vitruvius recorded what makes a design good: durability (firmitas), utility (utilitas), and charm (venustas). These quality requirements still hold, for buildings as well as software systems. A well-designed system is easy to implement, is understandable and reliable, and allows for smooth evolution. Badly-designed systems may work at first, but they are hard to maintain, difficult to test, and unreliable.
During the design phase, the system is decomposed into a number of interacting components. The top-level decomposition of a system into major components together with a characterization of how these components interact, is called its software architecture. Viewed this way, software architecture is synonymous with global design. There is, however, more to software architecture than mere global design.
Software architecture serves three main purposes:
It is a vehicle for communication among stakeholders. A software architecture is a global, often graphic, description that can be communicated with the customers, end users, designers, and so on. By developing scenarios of anticipated use, relevant quality aspects can be analyzed and discussed with various stakeholders. The software architecture also supports communication during development. It can be used to develop a skeletal version of the system. This skeletal version contains all of the architectures components in a rudimentary form. The skeletal system can be used as an environment for the incremental implementation of the system. It can also be used as an environment (test harness) for testing the system.
It captures early design decisions. In a software architecture, the global structure of the system has been decided upon, through the explicit assignment of functionality to components of the architecture. These early design decisions are important since their ramifications are felt in all subsequent phases. It is therefore paramount to assess their quality at the earliest possible moment. By evaluating the architecture, a first and global insight into important quality aspects can be obtained. The global structure decided upon at this stage also structures development: the work-breakdown structure may be based on the decomposition chosen at this stage, testing may be organized around this same decomposition, and so on.
 
It is a transferable abstraction of a system. The architecture is a basis for reuse. Design decisions are often ordered, from essential to nice features. The essential decisions are captured in the architecture, while the nice features can be decided upon at a later stage. The software architecture thus provides a basis for a family of similar systems, a so-called product line; see also chapter ??. The global description captured in the architecture may also serve as a basis for training, e.g. to introduce new team members.
The traditional view holds that the requirements fully determine the structure of a system. Traditional design methods as discussed in chapter 12 work that way. Their aim is to systematically bridge the gap between the requirements and some blueprint of an operational system in which all of the requirements are met. It is increasingly being recognized that other forces influence the architecture (and, for that matter, the design) as well:
Architecture is influenced by the development organization. In our library example, for example, the hardware and software for reading bar codes might be subcontracted to some organization having special expertise in that area. There will then be one or more system components with externallydictated functionality and interfaces to deal with this part of the problem. If an organization deploys one or more systems with a certain architecture, (maintenance) expertise will be structured according to the decomposition chosen in that architecture and there will be a pressure to have future systems follow that same architecture.
Architecture is influenced by the background and expertise of the architect. If an architect has positive experience with, say, a layered architecture, he is likely to use that same approach on his next project.
Architecture is influenced by its technical and organizational environment. In financial applications, for instance, government rules may require a certain division of functionality between system components. In embedded systems, the functionality of hardware components may influence the functionality of and interaction between software components. Finally, the software engineering techniques prevalent in the development organization will exert influence on the architecture.
This mutual influencing between an architecture and its environment is a cyclical process, known as the Architecture Business Cycle (ABC) (Bass et al., 2003). For example, an architecture yields certain units of work, corresponding to the components distinguished in the architecture. If the same components occur over and over again, expertise will be organized according to the functionality embedded in these components. The development organization may then become expert in certain areas. This expertise then becomes an asset which may affect the goals of the development organization. The organization may try to develop and market a series of similar products in which this expertise is exploited.
Traditional design is inward-looking: given a set of requirements, how can we derive a system that meets those requirements. Software architecture has an outward focus as well: it takes into account how the system fits into its environment. Software architecting includes negotiating and balancing of functional and quality requirements on one hand, and possible solutions on the other hand. This is further elaborated in section 11.1. Balancing requirements also requires that the candidate software architecture is assessed. This is a form of testing, discussed in section 11.5.
One of the early definitions of software architecture is (Shaw et al., 1995):
The architecture of a software system defines that system in terms of computational components and interactions among those components.
A more recent definition is (Bass et al., 2003):
The software architecture of a program or computing system is the structure or structures of the system, which comprise software elements, the externally visible properties of those elements, and the relationships among them.
The latter definition reflects, among others, the insight that there may be more than one structure that is of interest. In house construction, we also use different drawings: one for the electrical wiring, one for the water supply, etc. These drawings reflect different structures which are all part of the same overall architecture. We generally observe the architecture through one of these more specific views. The same holds for the software architecture. This is further elaborated in section 11.3.
In the software architecture, the global structure of the system has been decided upon. This global structure captures the early, major design decisions. Whether a design decision is major or not really can only be ascertained with hindsight, when we try to change the system. Only then will it show which decisions were really important. A priori, it is often not at all clear if and why one design decision is more important than another (Fowler, 2003). For instance, we may decide to separate the user interface from the processing part and store data about books in a flat file in our library system. Both decisions could be important, but need not be. Separating the user interface from the processing part is generally considered good design. If, at a later stage, changes occur in either part, we will be glad to have made this decision. If no such changes occur, the decision was not all that important, after all. Deciding to use flat files to store data in our library system may turn out to have been important if our library grows and we are forced to switch to database storage of data. But again, if no such change occurs, the decision wasnt that important either.
Viewed this way, the architectural design process is about making the important design decisions. Next, these important design decisions need to be documented. Both the process of making architectural decisions and their documentation for later use are discussed in section 11.2.
A very active field of research these days is aimed at identifying and describing components at a higher level of abstraction, i.e. above the level of a module or abstract data type. These higher-level abstractions are known as design patterns and software architectural styles (or architectural patterns).
Part of the work in software architecture is aimed at characterizing and classifying these software architectural styles, as well as developing appropriate notations and supporting tools. The ultimate goal is that the resulting abstractions become part of the vocabulary of software engineers, much like abstract data types are already part of that vocabulary. Section 11.4 gives an overview of the major issues involved in software architectural styles. Design patterns are further discussed in Chapter 12.
Todays work in software architecture is broad in scope. Almost any topic in software engineering is being rethought in architectural terms. The discussion in this chapter is focused on how to design, name, Document, and assess software architectures.
11.1	Software Architecture and the Software Life Cycle
If software architecture is just global design, we would be selling old wine in new bottles. The design phase then is simply split into two subphases: architectural, global design, and detailed design. The methods used in these two subphases might be different, but both essentially boil down to a decomposition process, taking a set of requirements as their starting point. Both design phases then are inward-looking:
starting from a set of requirements, derive a system that meets those requirements.
A proper software architecture phase however has an outward focus as well. It includes negotiating and balancing of functional and quality requirements on one hand, and possible solutions on the other hand. This means requirements engineering and software architecture are not subsequent phases that are more or less strictly separated, but instead they are heavily intertwined. An initial set of functional and quality requirements is the starting point for developing an initial architecture. This initial architecture results in a number of issues that require further discussion with stakeholders. For instance, the envisaged solution may be too costly, integration with already existing systems may be complex, maintenance may be an issue because of a lack of staff with certain expertise, or performance requirements cannot be met. These insights lead to further discussions with stakeholders, a revised set of requirements, and a revised architecture. This iterative process continues until an agreement is reached. Only then will detailed design and implementation proceed. The difference between these two paradigms is illustrated in figure 11.1.
We thus see important differences between the traditional process models without specific attention to software architecture, and process models which do pay attention to software architecture:
In traditional models, iteration only concerns functional requirements. Once the functional requirements are agreed upon, design starts. In process models that include a software architecture phase, iteration involves both functional
11.2. ARCHITECTURE DESIGN
 
	(a)	(b)
Figure 11.1 Software life cycle without (a) and with (b) explicit attention to software architecture
and quality requirements. Only when the combined set of functional and quality requirements is agreed upon, will development proceed.
Traditional models involve negotiation with a few stakeholders only. Usually, only the client and end users are involved. Negotiations about architectural solutions may involve a much larger variety of stakeholders, and include for instance the future maintenance organization for the system to be developed, or owners of other systems that this system has to interact with.
In traditional models there is no balancing of functional and quality requirements. Once the functional requirements are agreed upon, development proceeds and it is assumed that quality requirements can be met. If it turns out that the quality requirements cannot be met, the project gets into trouble. Deadlines slip, functionality is skipped, more hardware is bought, etc. In process models that include a software architecture phase, there is a balancing of functional and quality requirements at an early stage.
11.2	Architecture design
Design is a problem-solving activity, and as such very much a matter of trial and error. In the presentation of a mathematical proof, subsequent steps dovetail well into each other and everything drops into place at the end. The actual discovery of the proof was probably quite different. The same holds for the design of software. We should not confuse the outcome of the design process with the process itself. The outcome of the design process is a rational reconstruction of that process. (Note that we made precisely the same remark with respect to the outcome of the requirements engineering process.)
During design, the system is decomposed into parts that each have a lower complexity than the system as a whole, while the parts together solve the users problem. The design problem can now be formulated as follows: how to determine this decomposition. There really is no universal method for this. The design process is a creative one, and the quality and expertise of the designers is a critical determinant for its success. Yet, during the course of the years, a number of ideas and guidelines have emerged which may serve us in designing software. These have resulted in a large number of design methods, which are the topic of chapter 12.
In a similar vein, architectural design methods have been developed. A good example hereof is Attribute Driven Design (ADD), described in (Bass et al., 2003). The input to the ADD process are the requirements, formulated as a set of prioritized quality attribute scenarios. A quality attribute scenario is a scenario as known from requirements engineering, but whose description explicitly captures quality information; see also section 6.3.
ADD is described as a topdown decomposition process. In each iteration, one or a few components are selected for further decomposition. In the first iteration, there is only one component, the system. From the set of quality attribute scenarios, an important quality attribute is selected that will be handled in the current refinement step. For instance, in our library system, we may have decided on a first decomposition of the system into three layers: a presentation layer, a business logic layer, and a data layer. In a next ADD step, we may decide to decompose the presentation layer, and select usability as the quality attribute that drives this decomposition. A pattern is then selected that satisfies the quality attribute. For instance, a data validation pattern (Folmer et al., 2003) may be applied to verify whether data items have been entered correctly. Finally, the set of quality attribute scenarios is verified and refined, to prepare for the next iteration.
ADD gives little guidance for the precise order and kind of refinement steps. This is very much a matter of the architects expertise. The same rather global support is given by other architecture design methods, as discussed by Hofmeister et al. (2007). The global workflow common to these methods is depicted in figure 11.2. At the centre, the backlog is depicted. The backlog contains a list of issues to be tackled, open problems, ideas that still have to be investigated, and so on. The name derives from Scrum, an agile method (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002). There, the backlog drives the project. In (architecture) design projects, the notion of a backlog is usually not represented explicitly. Yet, it is always there, if only in the head of the architect. There are three inputs to the backlog: context, requirements, and evaluation results. The context refers to such things as upfront ideas the architect may have, available assets that can be used, constraints set, and the like. Obviously, the requirements
11.2. ARCHITECTURE DESIGN
constitute another important input. In each step of the architecting process, one or a few items from the backlog are taken and used to transform the architecture developed so far. The result of this transformation is evaluated (usually rather informally), and this evaluation may in turn change the contents of the backlog. New items may be added (for instance new problems), items may disappear or become obsolete, and the priorities of backlog items may change.
 
	Figure 11.2	Global workflow in architecture design
Figures 11.1(b) and 11.2 describe the same iterative process. Whereas the former emphasizes interactions with external parties, the latter emphasizes the architectural design process itself. The latter process model also is more finegrained. Many of the iterations involving one or more items of the backlog, a synthesis step, evaluation of the result and updating the backlog will be done by the architect and not involve communication with other stakeholders. But once in a while, communication with other stakeholders takes place, and this is the level at which figure 11.1(b) applies.
The architecture design process is very much driven by the architects experience, much more so than by any of the so-called architecture design methods. An experienced architect knows how to handle a given issue, rather than that some method tells him how to perform a design iteration. This is also true for the design methods discussed in chapter 12, that are applied at the more detailed levels of design. Their descriptions usually give much more guidance than those for architecture design methods. But this guidance is used by inexperienced designers mostly. Since architecture design is usually done by experienced designers, the amount of guidance given, and needed, is less. Attention then shifts to techniques for documenting the result of the design process: the decisions, their rationale, and the resulting design.
11.2.1	Architecture as a set of design decisions
If architecture is the set of design decisions, then documenting the architecture boils down to documenting the set of design decisions. This is usually not done, though. We can usually get at the result of the design decisions, the solutions chosen, but not at the reasoning behind them. Much of the rationale behind the solutions is usually lost forever, or resides only in the head of the few people associated with them, if they are still around.
So the reasoning behind a design decision is not explicitly captured. This is tacit knowledge, essential for the solution chosen, but not documented. At a later stage, it then becomes difficult to trace the reasons of certain design decisions. In particular, during evolution one may stumble upon these design decisions, try to undo them or work around them, and get into trouble when this turns out to be costly if not impossible.
There are different types of undocumented design decisions:
The design decision is implicit: the architect is unaware of the decision, or it concerns of course knowledge. Examples include earlier experience, implicit company policies to use certain approaches, standards, and the like.
The design decision is explicit but undocumented: the architect takes a decision for a very specific reason (e.g. the decision to use a certain user-interface policy because of time constraints). The reasoning is not documented, and thus is likely to vaporize over time.
The design decision is explicit, and explicitly undocumented: the reasoning is hidden. There may be tactical company reasons to do so, or the architect may have personal reasons (e.g. to protext his position).
It is an illusion to want to document all design decisions. There are far too many of them, and not all of them are that important. And documenting design decisions takes time and effort from the architect, a very busy person. But we may try to document the really important ones.
A design decision addresses one or more issues that are relevant for the problem at hand. There may be more than one way to resolve these issues, so that the decision is a choice from amongst a number of alternatives. The particular alternative selected preferably is chosen because it has some favorable characteristics. That is, there is a rationale for our particular choice. Finally, the particular choice made may have implications for subsequent decision making. Figure 11.3 gives a template for the type of information that is important to capture for each design decision.
Figure 11.4 gives an example of a design decision for our library application. It concerns the choice for a 3-tier architecture, consisting of a presentation layer, a business logic layer, and a data management layer.
Design decisions are often related. A given design decision may constrain further decisions, exclude or enable them, override them, be in conflict with them, and the
 
Element	Description
Issues	Design issues being addressed by this decision
Decision	The decision taken
Status	The status of the decision, e.g. pending, approved
Assumptions	The underlying assumptions about the environment in which the decision is taken
Alternatives	Alternatives considered for this decision
Rationale	An explanation of why the decision was chosen
Implications	Implications of this decision, such as the need for further decisions or requirements
Notes	Any	additional	information	one	might	want	to capture
	Figure 11.3	Elements of a design decision
like. These relationships between design decisions resemble the kind of relationships that may exist between requirements, as discussed in section 9.1.3. And likewise, the notations and tools used to capture this information are very similar as well. A simple way to structure design decisions hierarchically is in the form of a decision tree. An example hereof is given in figure 11.5.
11.3	Architectural views
A software architecture serves as a vehicle for communication among stakeholders. Example stakeholders are: end users of the anticipated system, security experts, representatives from the maintenance department, owners of other systems that this system has to interface with, software developers, and of course the architect himself. These stakeholders all have a stake, but the stakes may differ. End users will be interested to see that the system will provide them with the functionality asked for. Software developers will be interested to know where to implement this functionality. Maintainers want to assure themselves that components are as independent as possible.
In some cases, it may be possible to devise one single architecture representation that serves all these stakeholders. In general, this will not work, though. A specific stakeholder is best served by a representation of the software architecture that highlights his concerns. Another stakeholder is likely to be better served by another representation. Just think of civil engineering, where one representation may highlight the outer appearance, while another highlights construction aspects.
Element	Description
Issues	The system has to be structured such that it is maintainable, reusable, and robust.
Decision	A 3-tier architecture, consisting of a presentation layer, a business logic layer, and a data management layer.
Status	Approved.
Assumptions	The system has no hard real-time requirements
Alternatives	Alternatives are a Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA), or a different type of X-tier architecture (e.g. one with a fat client including both presentation and business logic, and a data management tier).
Rationale	Maintenance is supported and extensions are easy to realize because of the loose coupling between layers. Both the presentation layer and the data management layer can be reused as is in other applications. Robustness is supported because the different layers can easily be split over different media, and well-defined layer interfaces allow for smoother testing.
Implications	Performance is hampered since all layers have to be gone through for most user actions.
Notes	None.
	Figure 11.4	Elements of a design decision
IEEE standard 1471 (IEEE, 2000) gives a general structure for software architecture representations. The main elements from this standard are:
Stakeholder: an individual, team, or organization (or classes hereof) with interests in, or concerns relative to, a system.
View: a representation of a whole system from the perspective of a related set of concerns.
Viewpoint: A viewpoint establishes the purposes and audience for a view and the techniques or methods employed in constructing a view.
So	the	stakeholder	concerns	determine	which	representations,	called	views,	are appropriate	for	a	specific	software	architecture.	Each	view	has	a	corresponding
 
	Figure 11.5	Tree of design decisions
viewpoint which gives the syntax of the view, much like a construction drawing has an accompanying description telling what all the glyphs in the drawing mean.
IEEE 1471 does not tell you which viewpoints to use. In essence, it suggests we develop an appropriate set of viewpoints for each separate software architecture. It does have the notion of a library viewpoint, though, a viewpoint that might be useful across different software architectures. Bass et al. (2003) give a collection of viewpoints that is useful across a wide variety of software architectures. These viewpoints fall into three classes:
Module viewpoints give a static view of the system. They are usually depicted in the form of box and line diagrams where the boxes denote system components and the lines denote some relation between those components. Figure 11.6 describes typical module viewpoints.
Component and connector viewpoints give a dynamic view of the system, i.e. they describe the system in execution. Again, they are usually depicted as box and line diagrams. Figure 11.7 describes typical component and connector viewpoints.
Allocation viewpoints give a relation the system and its environment, such as who is responsible for which part of the system. Fig 11.8 gives typical allocation viewpoints.
Decomposition. In a decomposition viewpoint, elements are related by the is a submodule of relation. Larger elements are composed of smaller ones. It is the result of a topdown refinement process. The decomposition viewpoint often forms the basis for the project organization and the systems documentation.
Uses. In a uses viewpoint, the relation between elements is uses ( A calls B, A passes information to B, etc). The uses relation goes back to Parnas (1972); see also chapter 12. It is important when we want to assess modifiability: if an element is changed, all elements it is used by potentially have to be changed as well. It is also useful to determine incremental subsets of a system: if an element is in a given subset, all elements it uses must also be in that subset.
Layered. The layered viewpoint is a special case of the uses viewpoint. It is useful if we want to view the system as a series of layers, where elements from layer can only use elements from layers . Layers can often be interpreted as virtual machines.
Class. The class viewpoint describes how certain elements are a generalization of other elements. The relation between elements is inherits from. It is obviously most applicable for object-oriented systems.
 
	Figure 11.6	Module viewpoints
Of course, you are not going to use all these viewpoints for a single software architecture. Usually, one from each category will suffice. You may for instance choose the decomposition, deployment, and work assignment viewpoints. It is also possible to combine viewpoints. In figure 11.9 we have combined the decomposition viewpoint and the client-server viewpoint to create a view for our library system. In specific cases, additional architectural views may be helpful or needed. In systems for which the user interface is of critical importance, a separate user-interface view may be developed. In electronic commerce applications, a view highlighting security aspects may come in handy. And so on.
Many organizations have developed their own set of library viewpoints. A wellknown set of library viewpoints is known as the 4 + 1 model (Kruchten, 1995). It consists of the following viewpoints:
	a conceptual, or logical viewpoint, which describes the system in terms of major design elements and their interactions;
	an implementation viewpoint, which gives a view of the system in terms of modules or packages and layers;
Process. The process viewpoint describes the system as a series of processes, connected by communication or synchronization links. It is useful if we want to reason about the performance or the availability of the system.
Concurrency To determine opportunities for parallelism, a sequence of computations that can be allocated to a separate physical thread later in the design process is collected in a logical thread. It is used to manage issues related to concurrent execution.
Shared data This viewpoint shows how persistent data is produced, stored and consumed. It is particularly useful if the system centers around the manipulation of large amounts of data. It can be used to assess qualities such as performance and data integrity.
Client-server To describe a system that consists of cooperating clients and servers. The connectors are the protocols and messages that clients and servers exchange. This viewpoint expresses separation of concerns and physical distribution of processing elements.
 
	Figure 11.7	Component and connector viewpoints
 
Deployment This viewpoint shows how software is assigned to hardware elements, and which communication paths are used. This viewpoint allows one to reason about, e.g., performance, security, and availability.
Implementation This viewpoint indicates how software is mapped onto file structures. It is used in the management of development activities and for build processes.
Work assignment Shows who is doing what. This viewpoint is used to determine which knowledge is needed where. For instance, one may decide to assign functional commonality to a single team.
 
	Figure 11.8	Allocation viewpoints
	a process viewpoint which describes the dynamic structure of the system in terms of tasks, processes, their communication, and the allocation of
 
	Figure 11.9	A 3-tier architecture
functionality to run-time elements. This view is only needed if the system has a significant degree of concurrency;
	a deployment viewpoint, which contains the allocation of tasks to physical nodes. This view is only needed if the system is distributed.
The + 1 viewpoint is a set of important use cases. This set of use cases drives the architectural design, and serves as glue to connect the other four viewpoints. The 4 + 1 model now is part of the RUP development methodology (Kruchten, 2003).
The above viewpoints are all technical in nature. Often, it is also useful to construct one or more viewpoints which emphasize business concerns. Figure 11.10 gives a business oriented view of our library system. It addresses three aspects of the architecture: communication, storage, and layers. For each, several alternatives are given, and for each alternative the risk, time to market and cost are indicated. One alternative for each aspect is chosen. These alternatives are connected by curved lines. In this way, a quick overview is obtained. The view is easy to grasp, especially so for non-technical stakeholders  .
 
 	
Oracle
risk: ++ time-to-market: +
cost: --

	
MVC
risk: ++ time-to-market: + cost: +

Communication
Storage
Layers
	Figure 11.10	A business view
11.4	Architectural Styles
One interesting theory of problem-solving in the programming domain states that programmers solve such problems using programming plans, program fragments that correspond to stereotypical actions, and rules that describe programming conventions. For example, to compute the sum of a series of numbers, a programmer uses the running total loop plan. In this plan, some counter is initialized to zero and incremented with the next value of a series in the body of a loop. Experts tend to recall program fragments that correspond to plan structures before they recall other elements of the program. This nicely maps onto the idea that knowledge is stored in human memory in meaningful units (chunks).
An expert programmer has at his disposal a much larger number of knowledge chunks than a novice programmer. This concerns both programming knowledge and knowledge about the application domain. Both during the search for a solution and during program comprehension, the programmer tries to link up with knowledge already present. As a corollary, part of our education as programmer or software engineer should consist of acquiring a set of useful knowledge chunks.
At the level of algorithms and abstract data types, such a body of knowledge has been accumulated over the years, and has been codified in text books and libraries of reusable components. As a result, abstractions, such as QuickSort, embodied in procedures and abstract data types, such as Stack and BinaryTree, have become part of our vocabulary and are routinely used in our daily work.
The concepts embodied in these abstractions are useful during the design, implementation and maintenance of software for the following reasons:
They can be used in a variety of settings and can be given unique names. The names are used in communicating the concepts and serve as labels when retrieving and storing them in human memory. The label QuickSort rings the same bell for all people working in our field.
We have notations and mechanisms to support their use and reuse, such as procedure calls and the module concept.
We have organized related concepts into (semantic) networks that can be searched for an item that fits the problem at hand. For example, we know the time and space tradeoffs between QuickSort and BubbleSort, or between a standard binary search tree and an AVL-tree, and we know the grounds on which to make a choice.
Design patterns are collections of a few modules (or, in object-oriented circles, classes) which are often used in combination, and which together provide a useful abstraction. A design pattern is a recurring solution to a standard problem. The prototypical example of a pattern is the MVC (Model--View--Controller) pattern known from Smalltalk. We may view design patterns as micro-architectures. Design patterns are further discussed in section 12.5.
Two further notions often used in this context are (application) framework and idiom. An application framework is a semi-finished system which needs to be instantiated to obtain a complete system. It describes the architecture of a family of similar systems. It is thus tied to a particular application domain. The best known examples are frameworks for building user interfaces. An idiom is a low-level pattern, specific to some programming language. For example, the Counted Pointer idiom (Buschmann et al., 1996, pp 353--358) can be used to handle references to objects created dynamically in C++. It keeps a reference counter which is incremented or decremented when references to an object are added or removed. Memory occupied by an object is freed if no references to that object remain, i.e. when the counter becomes zero. Frameworks and idioms thus offer solutions that are more concrete and language-specific than the architectural styles and design patterns we will discuss.
The work in the area of software architecture and design patterns has been strongly influenced by the ideas of the architect Christopher Alexander, as formulated in his books The Timeless Way of Building and A Pattern Language. The term pattern derives from Alexanders work, and the format used to describe software architectural styles and design patterns is shaped after the format Alexander used to describe his patterns, like alcove, office connection or public outdoor room. In software engineering, we often draw a parallel with other engineering disciplines, in particular civil engineering. This comparison is made to highlight both similarities, such as the virtues of a phased approach, and differences, such as the observation that software is logical rather than physical, which hampers the control of progress. The comparison with the field of architecture is often made to illustrate the role of different views, as expressed in the different types of blueprint produced. Each of these blueprints emphasizes a particular aspect.
The classical field of architecture provides some further interesting insights for software architecture. These insights concern:
	the notion of architectural style,
	the relationship between style and engineering, and
	the relationship between style and materials.
Architecture is a (formal) arrangement of architectural elements. An architectural style abstracts from the specifics of an architecture. The decomposition of our library system might for instance result in an architecture consisting of one main program and four subroutines, sharing three data stores. If we abstract from these specifics, we obtain its architectural style, in which we concentrate on the types of its elements and their interconnections.
Viewed in this way, an architectural style describes a certain codification of elements and their arrangement. Conversely, an architectural style constrains both the elements and their interrelationships. For example, the Tudor style describes how a certain type of house looks and also prescribes how its design should look. In a similar vein we may characterize a software architectural style such as, say, the pipes-and-filter style.
Different engineering principles apply to different architectural styles. This often goes hand in hand with the types of materials used. Cottage-style houses and highrise apartment-buildings differ in the materials used and the engineering principles applied. A software design based on abstract data types (= material) emphasizes separation of concerns by encapsulating secrets (= engineering principle). A design based on pipes and filters emphasizes bundling of functionality in independent processes.
When selecting a certain architectural style with its corresponding engineering principles and materials, we are guided by the problem to be solved as well as the larger context in which the problem occurs. We cannot build a skyscraper from wooden posts. Environmental regulations may prohibit us erecting high-rise buildings in rural areas. And, the narrow frontages of many houses on the Amsterdam canals are partly due to the fact that local taxes were based on the number of street-facing windows. Similar problem- and context-specific elements guide us in the selection of a software architectural style.
These similarities between classical architecture and software architecture provide us with clues as to what constitutes a software architectural style and what its description should look like.
In his book A Pattern Language, the architect Christopher Alexander presents 253 patterns, ranging in scale from how a city should look down to rules for the construction of a porch. Perhaps his most famous pattern is about the height of buildings:
There is abundant evidence to show that high buildings make people crazy.
. . .
High buildings have no genuine advantage, except in speculative gains to banks and land owners. They are not cheaper, they do not help create open space, they make life difficult for children, they are expensive to maintain, they wreck the open spaces near them, and they damage the light and air and view. But quite apart from this, empirical evidence shows that they can actually damage peoples minds and feelings.
. . .
In any urban area, no matter how dense, keep the majority of buildings four stories high or less. It is possible that certain buildings should exceed this limit, but they should never be buildings for human habitation.
An Alexandrian pattern is not a cookbook, black-box recipe for architects, any more than a dictionary is a toolkit for a novelist. Rather, a pattern is a flexible generic scheme providing a solution to a problem in a given context. In a narrative form, its application looks like this:
IF you find yourself in context , for example examples , with problem ,
THEN for some reasons , apply pattern to construct a solution leading to a new context and other patterns .
The above Four-Story Limit pattern may for example be applied in a context where one has to design a suburb. The citation gives some of the reasons for applying this pattern. If it is followed, it will give rise to the application of other patterns, such as those for planning parking lots, the layout of roads, or the design of individual houses. 
Shaw (1996) characterizes a number of well-known software architectural styles in a framework that resembles a popular way of describing design patterns. Both the characterization and the framework are shaped after Alexanders way of describing
Type	Description
computational	The component performs a computation of some sort. Usually, the input and output to the component are fairly simple, e.g. procedure parameters. The component may have a local state, but this state disappears after the component has done its job. Example components of this type are (mathematical) functions and filters.
memory	A memory component maintains a collection of persistent, structured data, to be shared by a number of other components. Examples are a database, a file system, or a symbol table.
manager	A manager component contains a state and a number of associated operations. When invoked, these operations use or update the state, and this state is retained between successive invocations of the managers operations. Abstract data types and servers are example components of this type.
controller	A controller governs the time sequence of other events. A top-level control module and a scheduler are examples hereof.
Figure 11.11 Some component types (Source: M. Shaw & D. Garlan, Software Architecture: Perspectives on an Emerging Discipline, page 149, 1996, Reprinted by permission of
Prentice-Hall)
patterns. We will use this framework to describe a number of well-known and classic architectural styles. The framework has the following entries:
Problem A description of the type of problem this style addresses. Certain characteristics of the requirements will guide the designer in his choice of a particular style. For example, if the problem consists of a series of independent transformations, a pipes-and-filter type of architecture suggests itself.
Context A designer will be constrained in the use of a style by certain characteristics of the environment. Or, to put it the other way round, a style imposes certain requirements on the environment. For example, the pipes-andfilter style usually relies on operating system support for data transfer between filters.
Solution A description of the solution chosen. The major elements of a software architecture are components and connectors. Components are the building blocks of a software architecture. They usually embody a computational element of some sort (like a procedure), but a component can also be a data store (such as a database). The connectors describe how components interact. Some typical types of component and connector are given in figures 11.11 and 11.12.
The order of execution of components is governed by the control structure. The control structure captures how control is transferred during execution.
The choice of components and connectors is not independent. Usually, a style is characterized by a combination of certain types of component and connector, as well as a certain control structure. The system model captures the intuition behind such a combination.
It describes the general flavor of the system.
Variants Architectural styles give a rather general description. Often, certain variants or specializations may be identified, which differ from the general style.
Examples One should include references to real examples of a style. Architectural styles do not stem from theoretical investigations, but result from identifying and characterizing best practice.
Figures 11.13--11.18 contain descriptions of six well-known architectural styles: the main program with subroutines, abstract data type, implicit invocation, pipes and filters, repository and layered styles.
In the main-program-with-subroutines architectural style, the main tasks of the system are allocated to different components which are called, in the appropriate order, from a control component. The decomposition is strongly geared towards an ordering of the various actions to be performed with respect to time. The top-level component controls this ordering.
Components in the main-program-with-subroutines type of decomposition often use shared data storage. Decisions abaout data representations then are in fact a mutual property of the components that use those data. We may also try to make those decisions locally rather than globally. In that case the user does not get direct access to the data structures, but is offered an interface. The data can only be accessed through appropriate procedure or method calls. This is the essence of the abstract data type architectural style.
A major advantage of abstract data types over shared data is that changes in data representation and algorithms can be accomplished relatively easily. Changes in functionality, however, may be much harder to realize. This is because method invocations are explicit, hard-coded in the implementation. An alternative is to use the implicit invocation style. In implicit invocation, a component is not invoked
Type	Description
procedure call	With this type of connector, there is a single thread of control between the caller and the called component. Control is transferred to the component being called, and this component remains in control until its work has ended. Only then is control transferred back to the calling component. The traditional procedure call and the remote procedure call are examples of this type of connector.
data flow	With a data flow connector, processes interact through a stream of data, as in pipes. The components themselves are independent. Once input data to a component is available, it may continue its work.
implicit invocation	With implicit invocation, a computation is invoked when a certain event occurs, rather than by explicit interaction (as in a procedure call). Components raising events do not know which component is going to react and invoked components do not know which component raised the event to which they are reacting.
message passing	Message passing occurs when we have independent processes that interact through explicit, discrete transfer of data, as in TCP/IP. Message passing can be synchronous (in which case the sending/receiving process is blocked until the message has been completely sent/received) or asynchronous (in which case the processes continue their work independently).
shared data	When using shared data connectors, components operate concurrently on the same data space, as in blackboard systems or multiuser databases. Usually, some blocking scheme prevents concurrent writes to the same data.
instantiation	With instantiation, one component (the instantiator) provides space for the state required by another component (the instantiated), as in abstract data types.
Figure 11.12 Some connector types (Source:M.Shaw & D.Garlan, Software Architecture:
Perspectives on an Emerging Discipline, page 149-150,	1996, Reprinted by permission of
Prentice-Hall)
 
Style: Main program with subroutines
The system can be described as a hierarchy of procedure definitions. This style is a natural outcome of a functional decomposition of a system (see chapter 12). The top-level module acts as the main program. Its main task is to invoke the other modules in the right order. As a consequence, there is usually a single thread of control.
Context This style naturally fits in with programming languages that allow for nested definitions of procedures and modules.
Solution
System model Procedures and modules are defined in a hierarchy. Higherlevel modules call lower-level modules. The hierarchy may be strict, in which case modules at level can only call modules at level , or it may be weak, in which case modules at level may call modules at level
, with . Procedures are grouped into modules following such criteria as coupling and cohesion (see chapter 12).
Components (Groups of) procedures, which may have their own local data, and global data which may be viewed as residing in the main program.
Connectors Procedure call and shared access to global data.
Control structure There is a single, centralized thread of control; the main program pulls the strings.
Variants This style is usually applied to systems running on one CPU. Abstractly, the model is preserved in systems running on multiple CPUs and using the Remote Procedure Call (RPC) mechanism to invoke processes.
Examples (Parnas, 1972)
 
Figure 11.13 Main-program-with-subroutines architectural style (Source: M. Shaw, Some Patterns for Software Architectures, in J.M. Vlissides et al., Pattern Languages of Program Design 2, Reproduced by permission of Addison-Wesley.)
explicitly. Instead, a so-called event is generated. Other components in the system may express their interest in this event by associating a method with it; this method is automatically invoked each time the event is raised. Functional changes can be realized easily by changing the list of events components are interested in.
Some applications consist of a series of components in which component produces output which is next read and processed by component , in the same order in which it is written by component . In such cases, we need not explicitly Style: Abstract data type
A central issue is to identify and protect related bodies of information. The style is especially suited for cases where the data representation is likely to change during the lifetime of the system. When the design matches the structure of the data in the problem domain, the resulting components encapsulate problem-domain entities and their operations.
Context Many design methods, most notably the object-oriented ones, provide heuristics to identify real-world objects. These objects are then encapsulated in components of the system. Object-oriented programming languages provide the class concept, which allows us to relate similar objects and reuse code through the inheritance mechanism.
Solution
System model Each component maintains its own local data. Components hide a secret, viz. the representation of their data.
Components The components of this style are managers, such as servers, objects, and abstract data types.
Connectors Operations are invoked through procedure calls (messages).
Control structure There is usually a single thread of control. Control is decentralized, however; a component may invoke any component whose services it requires.
Variants Methods or languages that are not object-oriented only allow us to hide data representations in modules. Object-oriented methods or languages differ as regards their facilities for relating similar objects (single or multiple inheritance) and their binding of messages to operations (compile time or runtime); see also chapter 12.
Examples (Parnas, 1972); Booch (1994) gives a number of worked-out examples.
 
Figure 11.14 Abstract-data-type architectural style (Source: M. Shaw, Some Patterns for Software Architectures, in J.M. Vlissides et al., Pattern Languages of Program Design 2, Reproduced by permission of Addison-Wesley.)
create these intermediate data structures. Rather, we may use the pipe-and-filter mode of operation that is well-known from UNIX and directly feed the output of one transformation into the next one. The components are called filters and the FIFO connectors are called pipes. An important characteristic of this scheme is that any structure imposed on the data to be passed between adjacent filters has to be explicitly Style: Implicit invocation
We have a loosely-coupled collection of components, each of which carries out some task and may enable other operations. The major characteristic of this style is that it does not bind recipients of signals to their originators. It is especially useful for applications that need to be able to be reconfigured, by changing a service provider or by enabling and disabling operations.
Context This style usually requires an event handler that registers components interests and notifies others. Because of the intrinsically decentralized nature of systems designed this way, correctness arguments are difficult. For the same reason, building a mental model of such systems during program comprehension is difficult too.
Solution
System model Processes are independent and reactive. Processes are not invoked explicitly, but implicitly through the raising of an event.
Components Components are processes that signal events without knowing which component is going to react to them. Conversely, processes react to events raised somewhere in the system.
Connectors Components are connected through the automatic invocation of processes that have registered interest in certain events.
Control structure Control is decentralized. Individual components are not aware of the recipients of signals.
Variants There are two major categories of systems exploiting implicit invocation. The first category comprises the so-called tool-integration frameworks as exemplified by many software development support environments. They consist of a number of toolies running as separate processes. Events are handled by a separate dispatcher process which uses some underlying operating system support such as UNIX sockets; see for example (Reiss, 1990). The second category consists of languages with specialized notations and support for implicit invocation, such as the when-updated features of some object-oriented languages; see for example (Sutton et al., 1990).
Examples (Garlan et al., 1992); (Reiss, 1990); (Sutton et al., 1990).
 
Figure 11.15 Implicit-invocation architectural style (Source: M. Shaw, Some Patterns for Software Architectures, in J.M. Vlissides et al., Pattern Languages of Program Design 2,
Reproduced by permission of Addison-Wesley.)
Style: Pipes and filters
A series of independent, sequential transformations on ordered data. Usually, the transformations are incremental. Often, the structure of the datastreams is very simple: a sequence of ASCII characters. If the data has a rich structure, this will imply quite some overhead for the parsing and unparsing of the data.
Context This style requires that the system can be decomposed into a series of computations, filters, that incrementally transform one or more input streams. It usually relies on operating system operations to transfer the data from one process to another (pipes). Error handling is difficult to deal with uniformly in a collection of filters.
Solution
System model The resulting systems are characterized by continuous data flow between components, where the components incrementally transform datastreams.
Components The components are filters that perform local processing; i.e. they read part of their input data, transform the data, and produce part of their output. They have little internal state.
Connectors Datastreams (usually plain ASCII, as in UNIX).
Control structure Data flow between components. Each component usually has its own thread of control.
Variants Pure filters have little internal state and process their input locally. In the degenerate case they consume all of their input before producing any output. In that case, the result boils down to a batch-processing type of system.
Examples (Delisle and Garlan, 1990)
 
Figure 11.16 Pipes-and-filters architectural style (Source: M. Shaw, Some Patterns for Software Architectures, in J.M. Vlissides et al., Pattern Languages of Program Design 2, Reproduced by permission of Addison-Wesley.)
encoded in the datastream that connects these filters. This encoding scheme involves decisions which much be known to both filters. The data has to be unparsed by one filter while the next filter must parse its input in order to rebuild that structure. The Achilles heel of the pipes-and-filers scheme is error handling. If one filter detects an error, it is cumbersome to pass the resulting error message through intermediate filters all the way to the final output. Filters must also be able to resynchronize after an error has been detected and filters further downstream must be able to tolerate Style: Repository
The central issue is managing and maintaining a richly-structured body of information. The information must typically be manipulated in many different ways. The data is long-lived and its integrity is important.
Context This style often requires considerable support, in the form of a runtime system augmented with a database. Data definitions may have to be processed to generate support to maintain the correct structure of the data.
Solution
System model The major characteristic of this model is its centralized, richly structured body of information. The computational elements acting upon the repository are often independent.
Components There	is	one	memory	component	and	many	computational processes.
Connectors Computational units interact with the memory component by direct access or procedure call.
Control structure The control structure varies. In traditional database systems, for example, control depends on the input to the database functions. In a modern compiler, control is fixed: processes are sequential and incremental. In blackboard systems, control depends on the state of the computation.
Variants Traditional database systems are characterized by their transaction-oriented nature. The computational processes are independent and triggered by incoming requests. Modern compilers, and software development support environments, are systems that increment the information contained in the repository. Blackboard systems have their origin in AI. They have been used for complex applications such as speech recognition, in which different computational elements each solve part of the problem and update the information on the blackboard.
Examples (Barstow et al., 1984) for software development environments; (Corkill, 1997) for blackboard architectures.
 
Figure 11.17 Repository architectural style (Source: M. Shaw, Some Patterns for Software Architectures, in J.M. Vlissides et al., Pattern Languages of Program Design 2, Reproduced by permission of Addison-Wesley.)
Style: Layered
We can identify distinct classes of services that can be arranged hierarchically. The system can be depicted as a series of concentric circles, where services in one layer depend on (call) services from inner layers. Quite often, such a system is split into three layers: one for basic services, one for general utilities, and one for application-specific utilities.
Context Each class of service has to be assigned to a specific layer. It may occasionally be difficult to properly identify the function of a layer succinctly and, as a consequence, assign a given function to the most appropriate layer. This holds the more if we restrict visibility to just one layer.
Solution
System model The resulting system consists of a hierarchy of layers. Usually, visibility of inner layers is restricted.
Components The components in each layer usually consist of collections of procedures.
Connectors Components generally interact through procedure calls. Because of the limited visibility, the interaction is limited.
Control structure The system has a single thread of control.
Variants A layer may be viewed as a virtual machine, offering a set of instructions to the next layer. Viewed thus, the peripheral layers get more and more abstract. Layering may also result from a wish to separate functionality, e.g. into a userinterface layer and an application-logic layer. Variants of the layered scheme may differ as regards the visibility of components to outer layers. In the most constrained case, visibility is limited to the next layer up.
Examples (van der Linden and Mu ller, 1995), (Ho and Olsson, 1996), (Bohrer et al., 1998).
 
Figure 11.18 Layered architectural style (Source: M. Shaw, Some Patterns for Software Architectures, in J.M. Vlissides et al., Pattern Languages of Program Design 2, Reproduced by permission of Addison-Wesley.)
incomplete input.
The repository style fits situations where the main issue is to manage a richly structured body of information. In our library example in chapter 9, the data concerns things like the stock of available books and the collection of members of the library. These data are persistent and it is important that they always reflect the true state
 
of affairs. A natural approach to this problem is to devise database schemas for the various types of data in the application (books, journals, library clients, reservations, and so on) and store the data in one or more databases. The functionality of the system is incorporated in a number of, relatively independent, computational elements. The result is a repository architectural style.
Modern compilers are often structured in a similar way. Such a compiler maintains a central representation of the program to be translated. A rudimentary version of that representation results from the first, lexical, phase: a sequence of tokens rather than a sequence of character glyphs. Subsequent phases, such as syntax and semantic analysis, further enrich this structure into, for example, an abstract syntax tree. In the end, code is generated from this representation. Other tools, such as symbolic debuggers, pretty-printing programs, or static analysis tools, may also employ the internal representation built by the compiler. The resulting architectural style again is that of a repository: one memory component and a number of computational elements that act on that repository. Unlike the database variant, the order of invocation of the elements matters in the case of a compiler. Also, different computational elements enrich the internal representation, rather than merely update it.
The repository architectural style can also be found in certain AI applications. In computationally complex applications, such as speech recognition, an internal representation is built and acted upon by different computational elements. For example, one computational element may filter noise, another one builds up phonemes, etc. The internal representation in this type of system is called a blackboard and the architecture is sometimes referred to as a blackboard architecture. A major difference with traditional database systems is that the invocation of computational elements in a blackboard architecture is triggered by the current state of the blackboard, rather than by (external) inputs. Elements from a blackboard architecture enrich and refine the state representation until a solution to the problem is found.
Our final example of an architectural style is the layered architectural style. A prototypical instance hereof is the ISO Open System Interconnection Model for network communication. It has seven layers: physical, data, network, transport, session, presentation, and application. The bottom layer provides basic functionality. Higher layers use the functionality of lower layers. The different layers can be viewed as virtual machines whose instructions become more powerful and abstract as we go from lower layers to higher layers.
In a layered scheme, by definition, lower levels cannot use the functionality offered by higher levels. The other way round, the situation is more varied. We may choose to allow layer to use the functionality of each layer , with . We may also choose to limit the visibility of functionality offered by each layer, and for example restrict layer to use only the functionality offered by layer . A design issue in each case is how to assign functionality to the different layers of the architecture, i.e. how to characterize the virtual machine it embodies. If visibility is not restricted, some of the elegance of the layered architecture gets lost. This situation resembles that of programming languages containing low-level bit manipulation operations alongside while statements and procedure calls. If visibility is restricted, we may end up copying functionality to higher levels without increasing the level of abstraction.
van der Linden and Mu ller (1995) give an example of a layered architectural style for use in telecommunications. In this example, layers do not correspond to different levels of abstraction. Rather, the functionality of the system has been separated. Two main guidelines drive the assignment of functionality to layers in this architecture:
	hardware-dependent functionality should be placed in lower-level layers than application-dependent functionality.
	generic functionality should be placed in lower layers than specific functionality. The resulting architecture has four layers:
Operating system This layer comprises the runtime system, database, memory management, and so on.
Equipment maintenance This layer houses the control for peripheral devices and its interconnection structure. It deals with such things as data distribution and fault-handling of peripheral hardware. The bottom two layers together constitute the distributed operating infrastructure upon which applications run.
Logical-resource management Logical resources come in two flavors. The first class contains abstractions from hardware objects. The second class consists of software-related logical objects, such as those for call-forwarding in telephony. Service management This layer contains the application functionality.
A similar line of thought can be followed in other domains. For instance, it is hard to predict how future household electronic equipment will be assembled into hardware boxes. Will the PC and the television be in the same box? Will the television and the DVD player be combined or will they remain as separate boxes? No one seems to know. Since the half-life of many of these products is about six months, industry is forced to use a building-block approach, emphasizing reuse and the development of product families rather than products. A division of functionality into a hardwarerelated inner layer, a generic signal processing layer, and a user-oriented service layer suggests itself. The above architecture for telecommunications applications can be understood along the same lines.
In practice, we will usually encounter a mixture of architectural styles. For example, many software development environments can be characterized as a combination of the repository and layered architectural styles; see also chapter 15. The core of the system is a repository in which the various objects, ranging from program texts to work-breakdown structures, reside. Access to these objects as well as basic mechanisms for the execution and communication of tools are contained in a layer on top of this repository. The tools themselves are configured in one or more layers on top of these basic layers. Interaction between tools may yet follow another paradigm, such as implicit invocation.
	11.5	Software Architecture Assessment
The software architecture captures early design decisions. Since these early decisions have a large impact, it is important to start testing even at this early stage. Testing software architectures is commonly referred to as software architecture assessment. In a software architecture assessment, the software architecture is assessed with respect to quality attributes such as maintainability, flexibility, and so on.
It is important to keep in mind that in this process the architecture is assessed, while one hopes the results will hold for a system yet to be built. As a result, conclusions will often be at quite a general level. Also, there is some uncertainty about whether these results will actually be realized. Suppose the architecture is assessed for maintainability. Even if the outcome is quite positive, a sloppy implementation process may yet spoil the rosy picture. Figure 11.19 illustrates this issue. Architecture assessment takes place at the left-hand side of the figure, while one assumes the results will be valid for the right-hand side.
 
Figure 11.19 The relation between a software architecture assessment and actual system behavior
There are two broad classes of techniques to evaluate a software architecture. The first class comprises measuring techniques, and rely on quantitative information. Examples include architecture metrics and simulation. The second class comprises questioning techniques, in which one investigates how the architecture reacts to
 
11.5. SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE ASSESSMENT
certain situations. This is often done with the help of scenarios. In the sequel, we concentrate on the latter.
There are different types of scenarios one may use in architecture assessments. Common types are:
Use	cases:	these	often	are	already	available,	or	can	be	derived	from	the requirements.
Change cases: change cases describe possible or likely future situations. They describe what-if like situations, like what if our library has to be able to handle dvds next to books and journals.
Stress situations: these describe extreme conditions under which the system still has to operate, such as limits with respect to performance or the number of concurrent users of the system.
Far-into-the-future scenarios: these are like change cases, but farther away. For instance, we may envision a future in which a library changes from a document archive to a memory archive. We may want to retain how an old-fashioned bakery smells, or the sound of a San Francisco tram.
One of the best known architecture assessment methods is ATAM: the Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Method. As the name says, an important goal of ATAM is to determine how quality attributes interact. If we decide to include an authorization component to increase security, such is likely to degrade performance. By making the consequences of design decisions explicit, it becomes possible for stakeholders to trade off the different possibilities, and make informed decisions, with clear insight into the consequences thereof.
 
1.	Present method to stakeholders
2.	Present business drivers (by project manager)
3.	Present architecture (by lead architect)
4.	Identify architectural approaches
5.	Generate quality attribute tree
6.	Analyze architectural approaches
7.	Brainstorm and prioritize scenarios
8.	Analyze architectural approaches
9.	Present results
 
	Figure 11.20	Steps of ATAM
The main steps of ATAM are listed in figure 11.20. There may be a preparatory phase in which participants meet to discuss the whole exercise, and a follow-up phase at the end in which a written report is delivered. The first steps are meant to make the participants familiar with the major quality drivers for the system (step 2), the solution chosen (step 3), and the approaches and patterns used in this solution (step 4). In step 5, the quality requirements are articulated in more detail. The projects decision makers are key in this process. The end result of this exercise is a tree. The root node is termed utility. It expresses the overall quality of the architecture. The next level contains the quality attributes that will be evaluated. These are again broken down into more detailed constituents. The leaf nodes are concrete scenarios.
Figure 11.21 gives part of a possible utility tree for assessing our library system.
Response time
Performance
	Throughput	  100 transactions/sec
Training
UtilityUsability
Normal operations
	Maintainability	Vendor releases new database version
	Figure 11.21	An example utility tree
The leaf nodes in figure 11.21 are printed in italic. This description is incomplete. The full representation has to contain more information, for example the type of information contained in a quality attribute scenario (see section 6.3).
A complete utility tree may contain more scenarios than can be analyzed during the assessment. It is then useful to prioritize scenarios. ATAM suggests two criteria for doing so. Using the first criterion, the stakeholders indicate how important the scenarios are (e.g. using a simple 3-point scale: High, Medium, Low). Using the second criterion, the architect ranks the scenarios according to how difficult he believes it will be to satisfy the scenario, using the same 3-point scale. In the remainder of the assessment, one may then for instance concentrate on the scenarios that score High on both scales.
In step 6, the scenarios are discussed one at a time. For each scenario, the architect walks the stakeholders through the architecture, explaining how the architecture supports that scenario. This may trigger a further discussion of the architectural approaches chosen. The end result is a documented list of sensitivity points, tradeoff
11.6. SUMMARY
points, risks and nonrisks, relating the architectural decisions made to the relevant quality attributes.
A sensitivity point is a property of the architecture that is critical for a certain quality attribute. For example, the possibility to undo user actions critically affects the usability of our library system, and this property therefore is a sensitivity point with respect to usability. At the same time, this decision also is a sensitivity point with respect to performance. If a decision is a sensitivity point for more than one quality attribute, it is called a tradeoff point. If performance is of utmost importance, the decision to include an undo facility may be a risk. If this decision is not critical, it is a nonrisk.
The utility tree is based on the main drivers used during the design of the architecture. Its construction is done in consultation with the main decision makers. There are other stakeholders, such as a maintenance manager or security expert, that can also be polled for additional scenarios. This is done in step 7. And similar to step 5, these scenarios are prioritized, and a selection is made for further study. Similar to step 6, these additional scenarios are analyzed in step 8. Finally, the collected information is summarized and presented to all stakeholders in step 9.
The result of an architecture assessment goes way beyond a list of sensitivity points, tradeoff points, risks and nonrisks. Stakeholders, including the architect, often construct a much deeper understanding of the architecture, its underlying decisions, and the ramifications thereof. Also, a better documentation is often delivered as a byproduct of the assessment. This is similar to the extra benefits software inspections and walkthroughs have besides the identification of software errors (see section 13.4.2).
In practice, organizations often perform software architecture assessments in a less rigid sense than suggested by the above description of ATAM. Usually, a cafetaria-like approach is followed, whereby those elements from ATAM and similar methods are chosen that best fit the situation at hand (Kazman et al., 2006).
11.6	Summary
Software architecture is concerned with the description of elements from which systems are built, the interaction among those elements, patterns that guide their composition, and constraints on those patterns. The design of a software architecture is driven by quality concerns. The resulting software architecture is described in different views, each of which addresses specific concerns on behalf of specific stakeholders. This resembles the way different drawings of a building emphasize different aspects on behalf of its different stakeholders.
It is important to not only document the resulting solution, but also the decisions that led to that solution, its rationale, and other information that is helpful to guide its further evolution.
Software architecture is an important notion, for more than one reason:
The comparison with traditional architecture reveals commonalities which help us to get a better grip on the software design process and its products. Software architecture is not only concerned with the blueprint that is the outcome of the design process. The notion of an architectural style has merits of its own and the relationship between style on the one hand and engineering and materials on the other hand provide additional insights into what software design entails (Perry and Wolf, 1992).
The field may eventually yield a repertoire of concepts that software architects can use in their search for solutions. Expert designers in any field build on a vast collection of reusable concepts. These concepts are given unique names, which are used to communicate them, and serve as labels when retrieving and storing them in human memory. Software architecture is concerned with identifying, describing and categorizing components at a high level of abstraction. The resulting abstractions are to become part of the vocabulary of software engineers, much like abstract data types are already part of that vocabulary.
Phrasing a software design in software architectural terms promotes consistency during development and maintenance. Phrasing the global design in terms of an architecture forces us to think about its general flavor, in terms of types of component and connector, as well as a certain control structure. By making this intuition explicit, it both describes and prescribes how the system should look and how it may evolve over time.
A software architecture captures early design decisions. The architecture can be used to evaluate those decisions. It also provides a way to discuss those decisions and their ramifications with the various stakeholders.
	11.7	Further Reading
Shaw and Garlan (1996) is an early influential source that discusses the emerging field of software architecture, in particular software architectural styles. Bass et al. (2003) give a broad overview of the field, including the various forces that influence software architecture and the purposes of a software architecture, and ADD. It includes a number of case studies to illustrate these issues. Clements et al. (2003) is wholly devoted to architecture documentation and architectural views. The state of the art in software architecture is reflected in (Software, 2006). A comparison between the classical field of architecture and software architecture is made in (Perry and Wolf, 1992). Different architectural views on the same system are the topic of (Kruchten, 1995) and (Soni et al., 1995). Rozanski and Woods (2005) give a very good catalog of useful architectural viewpoints. Architecture as a set of design decisions is the topic of (Tyree and Akerman, 2005).
11.7. FURTHER READING
Software architecture and design patterns have been strongly influenced by the works of the architect Christopher Alexander. It is certainly worthwhile to have a look at them (Alexander et al., 1977), (Alexander, 1979). Lea (1994) gives an introduction to his work for software engineers. Alexander (1999) explains the origins of pattern theory. Buschmann et al. (1996) is an excellent source for architectural patterns. The theory of programming plans stems from (Soloway, 1986).
Clements et al. (2002) discusses software architecture evaluation in great depth. Maranzano et al. (2005) discuss experiences with architecture reviews. A survey of architecture assessment methods is given in (Dobrica and Niemela, 2002).
Many issues related to software architecture have not been touched upon in this chapter. These include efforts to classify software architectural styles along different dimensions (Shaw and Clements, 1996), architecture description languages and supporting tools (Shaw et al., 1995), architecture description languages (Medvidovic and Taylor, 2000), architecture reconstruction (van Deursen et al., 2004), the role of the software architect (Kruchten, 1999), (Mustapic et al., 2004).
Exercises
1.	Give a definition of the term software architecture. Explain the different elements in this definition.
2.	What is the difference between software architecture and top-level design?
3.	What is the main purpose of a software architecture?
4.	What is the relation between design decisions and software architecture?
5.	Explain the architecture design method ADD (Attribute Driven Design).
6.	What is the role of the backlog in design?
7.	What is the difference between the notions software architecture and design pattern?
8.	What is the difference between the conceptual or logical viewpoint and the implementation viewpoint?
9.	Explain the difference between module, component and connector, and allocation viewpoints.
10.	Describe in your own words the essence of the implicit-invocation architectural style.
11.	In what sense does the abstract-data-type architectural style constrain the designer?

12.	Why is error-handling difficult in the pipes-and-filter architectural style?
13.	Why is language so important in software design?
14.	Define the following component types: computational, memory, manager.
15.	Define the following connector types: data flow, message passing, shared data.
16.	In what sense may the layers in a layered architecture be viewed as virtual machines?
17.	What is a software architecture assessment?
18.	Explain the steps of ATAM.
19.	To what extent may the development organization, background and expertise of the designer, and the technical environment have influenced the architecture of the World Wide Web? See also (Bass et al., 2003, chapter 13).
20.	Take a software system you have been involved in. Identify and document three important design decisions for that system.
21.	For that same system, develop a module view. Indicate the concerns this view addresses.
22.	For that same system, develop a business oriented view. Indicate the concerns this view addresses.
23.	What are the possible roles of software architecture and design patterns during software comprehension?
24.	Write an essay on the influence of social and organizational issues on software architecture. See for example (Cockburn, 1996).
25.	Write an essay on the role of the software architect. See for example (Kruchten, 1999)
 
12 Software Design
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To be able to discern desirable properties of a software design
To understand different notions of complexity, at both the module and system level
To be aware of some object-oriented metrics
To be aware of some widely-known classical design methods
To understand the general flavor of object-oriented analysis and design methods
To be aware of a global classification scheme for design methods
To	understand	the	role	of	design	patterns	and	be	able	to	illustrate	their properties
To be aware of guidelines for the design documentation
Software design concerns the decomposition of a system into its constituent parts. A good design is the key to the successful implementation and evolution of a system. A number of guiding principles for this decomposition help to achieve quality designs. These guiding principles underlie the main design methods discussed in this chapter. Unlike more classical design fields, there is no visual link between the design representation of a software system and the ultimate product. This complicates the communication of design knowledge and raises the importance of proper design representations.
During software development, we should adhere to a planned approach. If we want to travel from point A to point B, we will (probably) consult a map first. According to some criterion, we will then plan our travel scheme. The time-loss caused by the planning activity is bound to outweigh the misery that occurs if we do not plan our trip at all but just take the first turn left, hoping that this will bring us somewhat closer to our destination.
In designing a garden, we will also follow some plan. We will not start by planting a few bulbs in one corner, an apple tree in another, and a poplar next to the front door.
The above examples sound ridiculous. They are. Yet, many a software development project is undertaken in this way. Somewhat exaggeratedly, we may call it the programmers approach to software development. Far too much software is still being developed without a clear design phase. The reasons for this code first, design later attitude are many:
We do not want to, or are not allowed to, waste our time on design activities.
We have to, or want to, quickly show something to our customer.
We are judged by the amount of code written per man-month.
We are, or expect to be, pressed for time.
Such an approach grossly underestimates the complexity of software and its development. Just as with the furnishing of a house or the undertaking of a long trip, it is paramount to put thought into a plan, resulting in a blueprint that is then followed during actual construction. The outcome of this process (the blueprint) will be termed the design or, if the emphasis is on its notation, the (technical) specification. The process of making this blueprint is also called design. To a large extent, the quality of the design determines the quality of the resulting product. Errors made during the design phase often go undetected until the system is operational. At that time, they can be repaired only by incurring very high costs.
Design is a problem-solving activity and, as such, very much a matter of trial and error. In the presentation of a mathematical proof, subsequent steps dovetail well into each other and everything drops into place at the end. The actual discovery of the proof was probably quite different. The same holds for the design of software. We should not confuse the outcome of the design process with the process itself. The outcome of the design process is a rational reconstruction of that process. (Note that we made precisely the same remark with respect to the outcome of the requirements engineering process.)
Software design is a wicked problem. The term originated in research into the nature of design issues in social planning problems. Properties of wicked problems in this area are remarkably similar to properties of software design:
There is no definite formulation of a wicked problem. The design process can hardly be separated from either the preceding requirements engineering phase or the subsequent documentation of the design in a specification. These activities will, in practice, overlap and influence each other. At the more global (architectural) stages of system design, the designer will interact with the user to assess fitness-for-use aspects of the design. This may lead to adaptations in the requirements specification. The more detailed stages of design often cannot be separated from the specification method used.
One corollary of this is that the waterfall model does not fit the type of problem it is meant to address.
Wicked problems have no stopping rule. There is no criterion that tells us when the solution has been reached. Though we do have a number of quality measures for software designs, there does not exist a single scale against which to measure the quality of a design. There probably never will be such a scale.
Solutions to wicked problems are not true or false. At best, they are good or bad. The software design process is not analytic. It does not consist of a sequence of decisions each of which brings us somewhat closer to that one, optimal solution. Software design involves making a large number of trade-offs, such as those between speed and robustness. As a consequence, there is a number of acceptable solutions, rather than one best solution.
Every wicked problem is a symptom of another problem. Resolving one problem may very well result in an entirely different problem elsewhere. For example, the choice of a particular dynamic data structure may solve the problem of an unknown input size and at the same time introduce an efficiency problem. A corollary of this is that small changes in requirements may have large consequences in the design or implementation. Elsewhere, we described this by saying that software is not continuous.
During design we may opt for a Taylorian, functionality-centered view and consider the design problem as a purely technical issue. Alternatively, we may realize that design involves user issues as well and therefore needs some form of user involvement. The role of the user during design need not be restricted to that of a guinea-pig in shaping the actual user interface. It may also involve much deeper issues.
Rather than approaching system design from the point of view that human weaknesses need to be compensated for, we may take a different stand and consider computerized systems as a means to support human strengths. Likewise, systems need not reflect the interests of system owners only. In a democratic world, systems can be designed so that all those involved benefit. This less technocratic attitude leads to extensive user involvement during all stages of system development. Agile development methods advocate this type of approach.
Whereas traditional system development has a production view in which the technical aspects are optimized, the Scandinavian school pays equal attention to the human system, and holds the view that technology must be compatible with organizational and social needs. The various possible modes of interaction between the designer or analyst on the one hand and the user on the other hand are also discussed in section 9.1. In this chapter, we concentrate on the technical issues of software design.
Pure agile approaches do suggest to start by just planting a few bulbs in one corner of the garden. If we happen to move into our new house in late autumn and want some color when spring sets in, this sounds like the best thing we can do. If we change our mind at some later point in time, we can always move the bulbs and do some additional garden design. It thus depends on the situation at hand how much upfront design is feasible. In this chapter, we assume enough context and requirements are known to warrant an explicit design step.
From the technical point of view, the design problem can be formulated as follows: how can we decompose a system into parts such that each part has a lower complexity than the system as a whole, while the parts together solve the users problem. Since the complexity of the individual components should be reasonable, it is important that the interaction between components not be too complicated.
Design has both a product aspect and a process aspect. The product aspect refers to the result, while the process aspect is about how we get there. At the very global, architectural levels of design, there is little process guidance, and the result is very much determined by the experience of the designer. For that reason, chapter 11 largely focuses on the characterization of the result of the global design process, the software architecture. In this chapter, we focus on the more detailed stages of design, where more process guidance has been accumulated in a number of software design methods. But for the more detailed stages of software design too, the representational aspect is the more important one. This representation is the main communication vehicle between the designer and the other stakeholders. Unlike more classical design fields, there is no visual link between the design representations of a software system and the ultimate product. The blueprint of a bridge gives us lots of visual clues as to how that bridge will eventually look like. Such is not the case for software, and we have to seek other ways to communicate design knowledge to our stakeholders.
There really is no universal design method. The design process is a creative one, and the quality and expertise of the designers are a critical determinant for its success. However, over the years a number of ideas and guidelines have emerged which may
 
serve us in designing software.
The single most important principle of software design is information hiding. It exemplifies how to apply abstraction in software design. Abstraction means that we concentrate on the essential issues and ignore, abstract from, details that are irrelevant at this stage. Considering the complexity of the problems we are to solve, applying some sort of abstraction is a sheer necessity. It is simply impossible to take in all the details at once.
Section 12.1 discusses desirable design features that bear on quality issues, most notably maintainability and reusability. Five issues are identified that have a strong impact on the quality of a design: abstraction, modularity, information hiding, complexity, and system structure. Assessment of a design with respect to these issues allows us to get an impression of design quality, albeit not a very quantitative one yet. Efforts to quantify such heuristics have resulted in a number of metrics specifically aimed at object-oriented systems.
A vast number of design methods exist, many of which are strongly tied to a certain notation. These methods give strategies and heuristics to guide the design process. Most methods use a graphical notation to depict the design. Though the details of those methods and notations differ widely, it is possible to provide broad characterizations in a few classes. The essential characteristics of those classes are elaborated upon in sections 12.2 and 12.3.
Design patterns are collections of a few modules (or, in object-oriented circles, classes) which are often used in combination, and which together provide a useful abstraction. A design pattern is a recurring solution to a standard problem. The opposite of a pattern is an antipattern: a mistake often made. The prototypical example of a pattern is the MVC (Model--View--Controller) pattern known from Smalltalk. Design patterns are discussed in section 12.5.
During the design process too, quite a lot of documentation will be generated. This documentation serves various users, such as project managers, designers, testers, and programmers. Section 12.6 discusses IEEE Standard 1016. This standard contains useful guidelines for describing software designs. The standard identifies a number of roles and indicates, for each role, the type of design documentation needed.
Finally, section 12.7 discusses some verification and validation techniques that may fruitfully be applied at the design stage.
12.1	Design Considerations
Up till now we have used the notion of module in a rather intuitive way. It is not easy to give an accurate definition of that notion. Obviously, a module does not denote some random piece of software. We apply certain criteria when decomposing a system into modules.
At the programming language level, a module usually refers to an identifiable unit with respect to compilation. We will use a similar definition of the term module with respect to design: a module is an identifiable unit in the design. It may consist of a single procedure, or a class, or even a set of classes. It preferably has a clean interface to the outside world, and the functionality of the module then is only approached through that interface.
There are, in principle, many ways to decompose a system into modules. Obviously, not every decomposition is equally desirable. In this section we are interested in desirable features of a decomposition, irrespective of the type of system or the design method used. These features can in some sense be used as a measure of the quality of the design. Designs that have those features are considered superior to those that do not have them.
The design features we are most interested in are those that facilitate maintenance and reuse: simplicity, a clear separation of concepts into different modules, and restricted visibility (i.e. locality) of information.  Systems that have those properties are easier to maintain since we may concentrate our attention on those parts that are directly affected by a change. These properties also bear on reusability, because the resulting modules tend to have a well-defined functionality that fits concepts from the application domain. Such modules are likely candidates for inclusion in other systems that address problems from the same domain.
In the following subsections we discuss five interrelated issues that have a strong impact on the above features:
	abstraction,
	modularity,
	information hiding,
	complexity, and
	system structure.
For object-oriented systems, a specific set of quality heuristics and associated metrics has been defined. The main object-oriented metrics are discussed in section 12.1.6.
	12.1.1	Abstraction
Abstraction means that we concentrate on the essential features and ignore, abstract from, details that are not relevant at the level we are currently working. Consider, for example, a typical sorting module. From the outside we cannot (and need not be able to) discern exactly how the sorting process takes place. We need only know that the output is indeed sorted. At a later stage, when the details of the sorting module are decided upon, then we can rack our brains about the most suitable sorting algorithm.
The complexity of most software problems makes applying abstraction a sheer necessity. In the ensuing discussion, we distinguish two types of abstraction: procedural abstraction and data abstraction.
The notion of procedural abstraction is fairly traditional. A programming language offers if-constructs, loop-constructs, assignment statements, and the like. The transition from a problem to be solved to these primitive language constructs is a large one in many cases. To this end a problem is first decomposed into subproblems, each of which is handled in turn. These subproblems correspond to major tasks to be accomplished. They can be recognized by their description in which some verb plays a central role (for example: read the input, sort all records, process the next user request, compute the net salary). If needed, subproblems are further decomposed into even simpler subproblems. Eventually we get at subproblems for which a standard solution is available. This type of (top-down) decomposition is the essence of the main-program-with-subroutines architectural style.
The result of this type of stepwise decomposition is a hierarchical structure. The top node of the structure denotes the problem to be solved. The next level shows its first decomposition into subproblems. The leaves denote primitive problems. This is schematically depicted in figure 12.1.
The procedure concept offers us a notation for the subproblems that result from this decomposition process. The application of this concept is known as procedural abstraction. With procedural abstraction, the name of a procedure (or method, in object oriented languages) is used to denote the corresponding sequence of actions. When that name is used in a program, we need not bother ourselves about the exact way in which its effect is realized. The important thing is that, after the call, certain prestated requirements are fulfilled.
This way of going about the process closely matches the way in which humans are inclined to solve problems. Humans too are inclined to the stepwise handling of problems. Procedural abstraction thus offers an important means of tackling software problems.
When designing software, we are inclined to decompose the problem so that the result has a strong time orientation. A problem is decomposed into subproblems that follow each other in time. In its simplest form, this approach results in input-process--output schemes: a program first has to read and store its data, next some process computes the required output from these data, and the result finally is output. Application of this technique may result in programs that are difficult to adapt and hard to comprehend. Applying data abstraction results in a decomposition which shows this affliction to a far lesser degree.
Procedural abstraction is aimed at finding a hierarchy in the programs control structure: which steps have to be executed and in which order. Data abstraction is aimed at finding a hierarchy in the programs data. Programming languages offer primitive data structures for integers, real numbers, truth values, characters and possibly a few more. Using these building blocks we may construct more complicated data structures, such as stacks and binary trees. Such structures are of general use in
 
	Figure 12.1	The idea of procedural abstraction
application software. They occur at a fairly low level in the hierarchy of data structures. Application-oriented objects, such as paragraph in text processing software or book in our library system, are found at higher levels of the data structure hierarchy. This is schematically depicted in figure 12.2.
 
	Figure 12.2	The idea of data abstraction
For the data, too, we wish to abstract from details that are not relevant at a certain level. In fact, we already do so when using the primitive data structures offered by our programming language. In using these, we abstract from details such as the internal representation of numbers and the way in which the addition of two numbers is realized. At the programming language level we may view the integers as a set of objects (0, 1, -1, 2, -2, . . . ) and a set of operations on these objects ( , , , , . . . ). These two sets together determine the data type integer. To be able to use this data type we need only name the set of objects and specify its operations.
We may proceed along the same lines for the data structures not directly supported by the programming language. A data type binary-tree is characterized by a set of objects (all conceivable binary trees) and a set of operations on those objects. When using binary trees, their representation and the implementation of the corresponding operations need not concern us. We need only ascertain the intended effect of the operations.
Applying data abstraction during design is sometimes called object-oriented design, since the type of object and the associated operations are encapsulated in one module. The buzzword object-oriented however also has a subtly different meaning. We will further elaborate upon this notion in section 12.3.
Languages such as Ada, Java and C++ offer a language construct (called package, class, and struct, respectively) that allows us to maintain a syntactic separation between the implementation and specification of data types. Note that it is also possible to apply data abstraction during design when the ultimate language does not offer the concept. However, it then becomes more cumbersome to move from design to code.
We noticed before that procedural abstraction fits in nicely with the way humans tend to tackle problems. To most people, data abstraction is a bit more complicated.
When searching for a solution to a software problem we will find that the solution needs certain data structures. At some point we will also have to choose a representation for these data structures. Rather than making those decisions at an early stage and imposing the result on all other components, you are better off if you create a separate subproblem and make only the procedural, implementation-independent, interfaces public. Data abstraction thus is a prime example of information hiding.
The development of these abstraction techniques went hand-in-hand with other developments, particularly those in the realm of programming languages. Procedures were originally introduced to avoid the repetition of instruction sequences. At a later stage we viewed the name of a procedure as an abstraction of the corresponding instruction sequence. Only then did the notion of procedural abstraction get its present connotation. In a similar vein, developments in the field of formal data type specifications and language notions for modules (starting with the class concept of SIMULA-67) strongly contributed to our present notion of data abstraction.
As a final note we remark that we may identify yet a third type of abstraction, control abstraction. In control abstraction we abstract from the precise order in which a sequence of events is to be handled. Though control abstraction is often implicit when procedural abstraction is used, it is sometimes convenient to be able to explicitly model this type of nondeterminacy, for instance when specifying concurrent systems. This topic falls outside the scope of this book.
12.1.2	Modularity
During design, the system is decomposed into a number of modules and the relationships between those modules are indicated. In another design of the same system, different modules may show up and there may be different relationships between the modules. We may try to compare those designs by considering both a typology for the individual modules and the type of connections between them. This leads us to two structural design criteria: cohesion and coupling.
Cohesion may be viewed as the glue that keeps the module together. It is a measure of the mutual affinity of the elements of a module. In general we will wish to make the cohesion as strong as possible. In their classic text on Structured Design, Yourdon and Constantine identify the following seven levels of cohesion of increasing strength:
Coincidental cohesion With coincidental cohesion, elements are grouped into modules in a haphazard way. There is no significant relation between the elements.
Logical cohesion With logical cohesion, the elements realize tasks that are logically related. One example is a module that contains all input routines. These routines do not call one another and they do not pass information to each other. Their function is just very similar.
Temporal cohesion A typical example of this type of cohesion is an initialization module. The various elements of it are independent but they are activated at about the same point in time.
Procedural cohesion A module exhibits procedural cohesion if it consists of a number of elements that have to be executed in some given order. For instance, a module may have to first read some datum, then search a table, and finally print a result.
Communicational cohesion This type of cohesion occurs if the elements of a module operate on the same (external) data. For instance, a module may read some data from a disk, perform certain computations on those data, and print the result.
Sequential cohesion Sequential cohesion occurs if the module consists of a sequence of elements where the output of one element serves as input to the next element.
Functional cohesion In a module exhibiting functional cohesion all elements contribute to the one single function of that module. Such a module often transforms a single input datum into a single output datum. The well-known mathematical subroutines are a typical example of this. Less trivial examples are modules like execute the next edit command and translate the program given.
In a classic paper on structured design, (Stevens et al., 1974) provide some simple heuristics that may be of help in establishing the degree of cohesion of a module. They suggest writing down a sentence that describes the function (purpose) of the module and examining that sentence. Properties to look for include the following:
If the sentence is compound, has a connective (such as a comma or the word and), or contains more than one verb, then that module is probably performing more than one function. It is likely to have sequential or communicational cohesion.
If the sentence contains words that relate to time (such as first, next, after, then), then the module probably has sequential or temporal cohesion.
If the sentence contains words like initialize, the module probably has temporal cohesion.
The levels of cohesion identified above reflect the cohesion between the functions that a module provides. Abstract data types cannot easily be accommodated in this scheme. (Macro and Buxton, 1987) therefore propose adding an extra level, data cohesion, to identify modules that encapsulate an abstract data type. Data cohesion is even stronger than functional cohesion.
It goes without saying that it is not always an easy task to obtain the strongest possible cohesion between the elements of a module. Though functional cohesion may be attainable at the top levels and data cohesion at the bottom levels, we will often have to settle for less at the intermediate levels of the module hierarchy. The trade-offs to be made here are what makes design such a difficult, and yet challenging, activity.
The second structural criterion is coupling. Coupling is a measure of the strength of the intermodule connections. A high degree of coupling indicates a strong dependence between modules. A high degree of coupling between modules means that we can only fully comprehend this set of modules as a whole and may result in ripple effects when a module has to be changed, because such a change is likely to incur changes in the dependent modules as well. Loosely-coupled modules, on the other hand, are relatively independent and are easier to comprehend and adapt. Loose coupling therefore is a desirable feature of a design (and its subsequent realization). The following types of coupling can be identified (from tightest to loosest):
Content coupling With content coupling, one module directly affects the working of another module. Content coupling occurs when a module changes another modules data or when control is passed from one module to the middle of another (as in a jump). This type of coupling can, and should, always be avoided.
Common coupling With common coupling, two modules have shared data. The name originates from the use of COMMON blocks in FORTRAN. Its equivalent in block-structured languages is the use of global variables.
External coupling With external coupling, modules communicate through an external medium, such as a file.
Control coupling With control coupling, one module directs the execution of another module by passing the necessary control information. This is usually accomplished by means of flags that are set by one module and reacted upon by the dependent module.
Stamp coupling Stamp coupling occurs when complete data structures are passed from one module to another. With stamp coupling, the precise format of the data structures is a common property of those modules.
Data coupling With data coupling, only simple data is passed between modules.
The various types of coupling emerged in the 1970s and reflect the data type concepts of programming languages in use at that time. For example, programming languages of that time had simple scalar data types such as real and integer. They allowed arrays of scalar values and records were used to store values of different types. Modules were considered data-coupled if they passed scalars or arrays. They were considered stamp-coupled if they passed record data. When two modules are control-coupled, the assumption is that the control is passed through a scalar value.
Nowadays, programming languages have much more flexible means of passing information from one module to another, and this requires a more detailed set of coupling levels. For example, modules may pass control data through records (as opposed to scalars only). Modules may allow some modules access to their data and deny it to others. As a result, there are many levels of visibility between local and global. Finally, the coupling between modules need not be commutative. When module A passes a scalar value to B and B returns a value which is used to control the further execution of A, then A is data-coupled to B, while B is control-coupled to A. As a result, people have extended and refined the definitions of cohesion and coupling levels.
Coupling and cohesion are dual characteristics. If the various modules exhibit strong internal cohesion, the intermodule coupling tends to be minimal, and vice versa.
Simple interfaces -- weak coupling between modules and strong cohesion between a modules elements -- are of crucial importance for a variety of reasons:
Communication between programmers becomes simpler. When different people are working on one and the same system, it helps if decisions can be made locally and do not interfere with the working of other modules.
Correctness proofs become easier to derive.
It is less likely that changes will propagate to other modules, which reduces maintenance costs.
The reusability of modules is increased. The fewer assumptions that are made about an elements environment, the greater the chance of fitting another environment.
The comprehensibility of modules is increased. Humans have limited memory capacity for information processing. Simple module interfaces allow for an understanding of a module independent of the context in which it is used.
Empirical studies show that interfaces exhibiting weak coupling and strong cohesion are less error-prone than those that do not have these properties.
12.1.3	Information Hiding
The concept of information hiding originates from a seminal paper of David Parnas Parnas (1972). The principle of information hiding is that each module has a secret which it hides to other modules. Its use as a guiding principle in design is aptly illustrated in the KWIC-index example. In the second decomposition, for example, module Store hides how lines are stored and module Sort hides how and when shifts are sorted.
Design involves a sequence of decisions, such as how to represent certain information, or in which order to accomplish tasks. For each such decision we should ask ourselves which other parts of the system need to know about the decision and how it should be hidden from parts that do not need to know.
Information hiding is closely related to the notions of abstraction, cohesion, and coupling. If a module hides some design decision, the user of that module may abstract from (ignore) the outcome of that decision. Since the outcome is hidden, it cannot possibly interfere with the use of that module. If a module hides some secret, that secret does not permeate the modules boundary, thereby decreasing the coupling between that module and its environment. Information hiding increases cohesion, since the modules secret is what binds the modules constituents together. Note that, in order to maximize its cohesion, a module should hide one secret only.
It depends on the programming language used whether the separation of concerns obtained during the design stage will be identifiable in the ultimate code. To some extent, this is of secondary concern. The design decomposition will be reflected, if only implicitly, in the code and should be explicitly recorded (for traceability purposes) in the technical documentation. It is of great importance for the later evolution of the system. A confirmation of the impact of such techniques as information hiding on the maintainability of software can be found in (Boehm, 1983).
12.1.4	Complexity
Like all good inventions, readability yardsticks can cause harm in misuse. They are handy statistical tools to measure complexity in prose. They are useful to determine whether writing is gauged to its audience. But they are not formulas for writing . . . Writing remains an art governed by many principles. By no means all factors that create interest and affect clarity can be measured objectively.
(Gunning, 1968)
In a very general sense, the complexity of a problem refers to the amount of resources required for its solution. We may try to determine complexity in this way by measuring, say, the time needed to solve a problem. This is a so-called external attribute: we are not looking at the entity itself (the problem), but at how it behaves.
In the present context, complexity refers to attributes of the software that affect the effort needed to construct or change a piece of software. These are internal attributes: they can be measured purely in terms of the software itself. For example, we need not execute the software to determine their values.
Both these notions are very different from the complexity of the computation performed (with respect to time or memory needed). The latter is a well-established field in which many results have been obtained. This is much less true for the type of complexity in which we are interested. Software complexity in this sense is still a rather elusive notion.
Serious efforts have been made to measure software complexity in quantitative terms. The resulting metrics are intended to be used as anchor points for the decomposition of a system, to assess the quality of a design or program, to guide reengineering efforts, etc. We then measure certain attributes of a software system, such as its length, the number of if-statements, or the information flow between modules, and try to relate the numbers thus obtained to the systems complexity. The type of software attributes considered can be broadly categorized into two classes:
	intra-modular attributes are attributes of individual modules, and
	inter-modular attributes are attributes of a system viewed as a collection of modules with dependencies.
In this subsection we are dealing with intra-modular attributes. Inter-modular attributes are discussed in the next subsection. We may distinguish two classes of complexity metrics:
Size-based complexity metrics. The size of a piece of software, such as the number of lines of code, is fairly easy to measure. It also gives a fair indication of the effort needed to develop that piece of software (see also chapter 7). As a consequence, it could also be used as a complexity metric.
Structure-based complexity metrics. The structure of a piece of software is a good indicator of its design quality, because a program that has a complicated control structure or uses complicated data structures is likely to be difficult to comprehend and maintain, and thus more complex.
The easiest way to measure software size is to count the number of lines of code. We may then impose limits on the number of lines of code per module. In (Weinberg, 1971), for instance, the ideal size of a module is said to be 30 lines of code. In a variant hereof, limits are imposed on the number of elements per module. Some people claim that a module should contain at most seven elements. This number seven can be traced back to research in psychology, which suggests that human memory is hierarchically organized with a short-term memory of about seven slots, while there is a more permanent memory of almost unlimited capacity. If there are more than seven pieces of information, they cannot all be stored in short-term memory and information gets lost.
There are serious objections to the direct use of the number of lines of code as a complexity metric. Some programmers write more verbose programs than others. We should at least normalize the counting to counteract these effects and be able to compare different pieces of software. This can be achieved by using a prettyprinter, a piece of software that reproduces programs in a given language in a uniform way.
A second objection is that this technique makes it hard to compare programs written in different languages. If the same problem is solved in different languages, the results may differ considerably in length. For example, APL is more compact than COBOL.
Finally, some lines are more complex than others. An assignment like a:= b looks simpler than a loop
	while p .next	nil do p:= p .next
although they each occupy one line.
Halsteads method, also known as software science, uses a refinement of counting lines of code. This refinement is meant to overcome the problems associated with metrics based on a direct count of lines of code.
Halsteads method uses the number of operators and operands in a piece of software. The set of operators includes the arithmetic and Boolean operators, as well as separators (such as a semicolon between adjacent instructions) and (pairs of) reserved words. The set of operands
contains the variables and constants used. Halstead then defines four basic entities:
	is the number of unique (i.e. different) operators in the program;
	is the number of unique (i.e. different) operands in the program;
	is the total number of occurrences of operators;
	is the total number of occurrences of operands.
Figure 12.3 contains a simple sorting program. Table 12.1 lists the operators and operands of this program together with their frequency. Note that there is no generally agreed definition of what exactly an operator or operand is. So the numbers given have no absolute meaning. This is part of the criticism of this theory.
Using the primitive entities defined above, Halstead defines a number of derived entities, such as:
1	procedure sort(var x: array; n: integer);
2	var i, j, save: integer;
3	begin
4	for i:= 2 to n do
5	for j:= 1 to i do
6	if x[i]	x[j] then
7	begin save:= x[i];
8	x[i]:= x[j];
9	x[j]:= save
10	end
11	end;
	Figure 12.3	A simple sorting routine
Table 12.1 Counting the number of operators and operands in the sort routine
 
	Number of	Number of
	Operator	Operand
	occurrences	occurrences
 
procedure 1 x 7 sort() 1 n 2 var 2 i 6
: 3 j 5 array 1 save 3
;	6	2	1 integer	2	1	1
,	2 begin . . . end	2 for . . . do	2 if . . . then	1
	:=	5
1
	[ ]	6
 
	Size of the vocabulary:	.
	Program length:	.
	Program volume:	.
This is the minimal number of bits needed to store elements from a set of cardinality .
	Program level:	.
Here is the most compact representation of the algorithm in question. For the example in figure 12.3 this is sort(x, n);, so , and .
From the formula it follows that is at most 1. Halstead postulates that the program level increases if the number of different operands increases, while it decreases if the number of different operators or the total number of operands increases. As an approximation of , he therefore suggests:
.
	Programming effort:	.
The effort needed increases with volume and decreases as the program level increases. represents the number of mental discriminations (decisions) to be taken while implementing the problem solution.
	Estimated programming time in seconds:	.
The constant 18 is determined empirically. Halstead explains this number by referring to (Stroud, 1967), which discusses the speed with which human memory processes sensory input. This speed is said to be 5--20 units per second. In Halsteads theory, the number 18 is chosen. This number is also referred to as Strouds number.
The above entities can only be determined after the program has been written. It is, however, possible to estimate a number of these entities. When doing so, the values for and are assumed to be known. This may be the case, for instance, after the detailed design step. Halstead then estimates program length as:
An explanation for this formula can be given as follows. There are ways to combine the given symbols such that operators and operands alternate. However, the program is organized and organization generally gives a logarithmic reduction in the number of possibilities. Doing so yields the above formula for . Table 12.2 lists the values for a number of entities from Halsteads theory for the example program in figure 12.3.
A number of empirical studies have addressed the predictive value of Halsteads formulae. These studies often give positive evidence of the validity of the theory.
The theory has also been heavily criticized. The underpinning of Halsteads formulas is not convincing. Results from cognitive psychology, like Strouds number, are badly used, which weakens the theoretical foundation. Halstead concentrates on the coding phase and assumes that programmers are 100% devoted to a programming task for an uninterrupted period of time. Practice is likely to be quite different.
Table 12.2 Values for software science entities for the example program in
figure 12.3
Entity	Value
Size vocabulary	21
Program length	60
Estimated program length	73
Program volume	264
Level of abstraction	0.044
Estimated level of abstraction	0.040
Programming effort	6000
Estimated programming time	333s
Different people use quite different definitions of the notions of operator and operand, which may lead to widely different outcomes for the values of entities.
Yet, Halsteads work has been very influential. It was the first major body of work to point out the potential of software metrics for software development.
The second class of intra-modular complexity metrics concerns metrics based on the structure of the software. If we try to derive a complexity metric from the structure of a piece of software, we may focus on the control structure, the data structures, or a combination of these.
If we base the complexity metric on the use of data structures, we may for instance do so by considering the number of instructions between successive references to one and the same object. If this number is large, information about these variables must be retained for a long period of time when we try to comprehend that program text. Following this line of thought, complexity can be related to the average number of variables for which information must be kept by the reader.
The best-known complexity metric from the class of structure-based complexity metrics is McCabes cyclomatic complexity. McCabe bases his complexity metric on a (directed) graph depicting the control flow of the program. He assumes that the graph of a single procedure or single main program has a unique start and end node, that each node is reachable from the start node, and that the end node can be reached from each node. In that case, the graph is connected. If the program consists of a main program and one or more procedures, then the control graph has a number of connected components, one for the main program and one for each of its procedures.
The cyclomatic complexity	equals the number of predicates (decisions) plus 1 in the program that corresponds to this control graph. Its formula reads
 
	Figure 12.4	Control flow graph of the example program from figure 12.3
where , and denote the number of edges, nodes, and connected components in the control graph, respectively.
Figure 12.4 shows the control flow graph of the example program from figure 12.3. The numbers inside the nodes correspond to the line numbers from figure 12.3. The cyclomatic complexity of this graph is 13-11+1+1=4. The decisions in the program from figure 12.3 occur in lines 4, 5 and 6. In both for-loops the decision is to either exit the loop or iterate it. In the if-statement, the choice is between the then-part and the else-part.
McCabe suggests imposing an upper limit of ten for the cyclomatic complexity of a program component. McCabes complexity metric is also applied to testing. One criterion used during testing is to get a good coverage of the possible paths through the program. Applying McCabes cyclomatic complexity leads to a structured testing strategy involving the execution of all linearly-independent paths (see also chapter 13) .
Complexity metrics like those of Halstead, McCabe and many others, all measure attributes which are in some sense related to the size of the task to be accomplished, be it the time in man-months, the number of lines of code, or something else. As such they may serve various purposes: determining the optimal size of a module, estimating the number of errors in a module, or estimating the cost of a piece of software.
All known complexity metrics suffer from some serious shortcomings, though:
They are not very context-sensitive. For example, any program with five if-statements has the same cyclomatic complexity. Yet we may expect that different organizations of those if-statements (consecutive versus deeply nested, say) have their effect on the perceived complexity of those programs. In terms of measurement theory, this means that cyclomatic complexity does not fulfill the representation condition, which says that the empirical relations should be preserved in the numerical relation system. If we empirically observe that program A is more complex than program B, then any complexity metric should be such that .
They measure only a few facets. Halsteads method does not take into account the control flow complexity, for instance.
We may formulate these shortcomings as follows: complexity metrics tell us something about the complexity of a program (i.e. a higher value of the metric is likely to induce a higher complexity), but a more complex program does not necessarily result in a higher value for a complexity metric. Complexity is made up of many specific attributes. It is unlikely that there will ever be one general complexity metric.
We should thus be very careful in the use of these complexity metrics. Since they seem to measure along different dimensions of what is perceived as complexity, the use of multiple metrics is likely to yield better insights. But even then the results must be interpreted with care. (Redmond and Ah-Chuen, 1990), for instance, evaluated various complexity metrics for a few systems, including the MINIX operating system. Of the 277 modules in MINIX, 34 have a cyclomatic complexity greater than ten. The highest value (58) was observed for a module that handles a number of ASCII escape character sequences from the keyboard. This module, and most others with a large cyclomatic complexity, was considered justifiably complex. An attempt to reduce the complexity by splitting those modules would increase the difficulty of understanding them while artificially reducing its complexity value. Complexity yardsticks too can cause harm in misuse.
Finally, we may note that various validations of both software science and cyclomatic complexity indicate that they are not substantially better indicators of coding effort, maintainability, or reliability than the length of a program (number of lines of code). The latter is much easier to determine, though.
The high correlation that is often observed between a size-related complexity metric and a control-related complexity metric such as McCabes cyclomatic complexity should not come as a surprise. Large programs tend to have more if-statements than small programs. What counts, however, is the density with which those if-statements occur. This suggests a complexity metric of the form rather than .
12.1.5	System Structure
We may depict the outcome of the design process, a set of modules and their mutual dependencies, in a graph. The nodes of this graph correspond to modules and the edges denote relations between modules. We may think of many types of intermodule relations, such as:
	module A contains module B;
	module A follows module B;
	module A delivers data to module B;
	module A uses module B.
The type of dependencies we are interested in are those that determine the complexity of the relations between modules. The amount of knowledge that modules have of each other should be kept to a minimum. To be able to assess this, it is important to know, for each module, which other modules it uses, since that tells us which knowledge of each other they (potentially) use. In a proper design the information flow between modules is restricted to flow that comes about through procedure calls.
The graph depicting the uses-relation is therefore often termed a call graph.
The call graph may have different shapes. In its most general form it is a directed graph (figure 12.5a).  If the graph is acyclic, i.e. it does not contain a path of the form
, the uses-relation forms a hierarchy. We may then decompose
the graph into a number of distinct layers such that a module at one layer uses only modules from lower layers (figure 12.5b). Going one step further, we get at a scheme like the one in figure 12.5c, where modules from level use only modules from level
. Finally, if each module is used by only one other module, the graph reduces to a tree (figure 12.5d).
There are various aspects of the call graph that can be measured. Directly measurable attributes that relate to the shape of the call graph include:
its size, measured in terms of the number of nodes, the number of edges, or the sum of these;
its depth, the length of the longest path from the root to some leaf node (in an acyclic directed graph);
 
Figure 12.5 Module hierarchies. (a) directed graph, (b) directed acyclic graph, (c) layered graph, (d) tree
its width, the maximum number of nodes at some level (in an acyclic directed graph).
We do not know of studies that try to quantitatively relate those measures to other complexity-related aspects such as debugging time, maintainability, etc. They may be used, though, as one of the parameters in a qualitative assessment of a design.
It is often stated that a good design should have a tree-like call graph. It is therefore worthwhile to consider the tree impurity of a call graph, i.e. the extent to which the graph deviates from a pure tree. Suppose we start with a connected (undirected) graph (like the ones in figure 12.5b-d, if we ignore the direction of the arrows). If the graph is not a tree, it has at least one cycle, i.e. a path from some node A via one or more other nodes back to A again. We may then remove one of the edges from this cycle, and the result will still be a connected graph. We may continue removing edges from cycles until the result is a tree. We did so in the transition from figure 12.5b to 12.5c to 12.5d. The final result is called the graphs spanning tree. The number of edges removed in this process is an indication of the graphs tree impurity.
In order to obtain a proper measure of tree impurity we proceed as follows. The complete graph is the graph with nodes and the maximum number of edges. This maximum number of edges is . A tree with nodes has edges. Given a connected graph with nodes and edges, we define its tree impurity as the number of extra edges divided by the maximum number of extra edges:
This measure of tree impurity fits our intuitive notion of that concept. The value of lies between 0 and 1. It is 0 if is a tree and 1 if it is a complete graph. If we add an edge to , the value of increases. Moreover, the penalty of extra edges is proportional to the size of the spanning tree.
It is not always easy, or even meaningful, to strive for a neat hierarchical decomposition. We will often have to settle for a compromise. It may for instance be appropriate to decompose a system into a number of clusters, each of which contains a number of modules. The clusters may then be organized hierarchically, while the modules within a given cluster show a more complicated interaction pattern. Also, tree-like call graphs do not allow for reuse (if a module is reused within the same program, its node in the call graph has at least two ancestors).
The call graph allows us to assess the structure of a design. In deriving the measures above, each edge in the call graph is treated alike. Yet, the complexity of the information flow that is represented by the edges is likely to vary. As noted in the earlier discussion on coupling, we would like the intermodule connections to be thin. Therefore, we would like a measure which does not merely count the edges, but which also considers the amount of information that flows through them.
The best known attempt to measure the total level of information flow between the modules of a system is due to (Henri and Kafura, 1981). Their measures were able to identify change-prone UNIX procedures and evaluate potential design changes. (Shepperd, 1990) studied the information flow measure extensively and proposed several refinements, thus obtaining a purer metric. Using Shepperds definitions, the information flow measure is based on the following notions of local and global data flow:
A local flow from module A to module B exists if
(a)	A invokes B and passes it a parameter, or (b)	B invokes A and A returns a value.
A global flow from module A to module B exists if A updates some global data structure and B retrieves from that structure.
Using these notions of local and global data flow, Shepperd defines the complexity
	of a module	as
	fan-in	fan-out
where
 fan-in	is the number of (local and global) flows whose sink is	, and  fan-out	is the number of (local and global) flows whose source is	.
A weak point of the information flow metric is that all flows have equal weight. Passing one simple integer as parameter and invoking a complex global data structure contribute equally to this measure of complexity. The abstract data type architectural style easily results in modules with a high fan-in and fan-out. If the same system is built using global data structures, its information flow metric is likely to have a smaller value. Yet, the information flow both to and from the modules in the abstract data type style generally concern simple scalar values only, and are therefore considered simpler.
In a more qualitative sense, the information flow metric may indicate spots in the design that deserve our attention. If some module has a high fan-in, this may indicate that the module has little cohesion. Also, if we consider the information flow per level in a layered architecture, an excessive increase from one level to the next might indicate a missing level of abstraction.
During design, we (pre)tend to follow a top-down decomposition strategy. We may also take a completely different stand and try to compose a hierarchical system structure from a flat collection of system elements. Elements that are in some sense closest to one another are grouped together. We then have to define some measure for the distance between elements and a mathematical technique known as cluster analysis can be used to do the actual grouping. Elements in the same group are more like other elements within the same group and less like elements in other groups. If the measure is based on the number of data types that elements have in common, this clustering results in abstract data types or, more generally, modules having high cohesion. If the measure is based on the number of data bindings between elements, the result is likely to have a low value for the information-flow metric.
The measure chosen, in a sense, determines how we define friendship between elements. Close friends should be grouped in the same module while distant relatives may reside in different modules. The various qualitative and quantitative design criteria that we discussed above have different, but in essence very similar, definitions of friendship.
Though much work remains to be done, a judicious use of available design metrics is already a valuable tool in the design and quality assurance of software systems.
12.1.6	Object-Oriented Metrics
At the level of individual methods of an object-oriented system, we may assess quality characteristics of components by familiar metrics such as: length, cyclomatic complexity, and the like. At higher levels of abstraction, object-oriented systems consist of a collection of classes that interact by sending messages. Familiar intermodular metrics which focus on the relationships between modules do not account for the specifics of object-oriented systems. In this section, we discuss a few metrics specifically aimed at characteristics of object-oriented systems. These metrics are listed in figure 12.6.
 
	WMC	Weighted Methods per Class
	DIT	Depth of class in Inheritance Tree
	NOC	Number Of Children
	CBO	Coupling Between Object classes
	RFC	Response For a Class
	LCOM	Lack of Cohesion of a Method
 
	Figure 12.6	A suite of object-oriented metrics
WMC is a measure for the size of a class. The assumption is that larger classes are in general less desirable. They take more time to develop and maintain, and they are likely to be less reusable. The formula is: WMC = , where is the complexity of method . For the complexity of an individual method we may choose its length, cyclomatic complexity, and so on. Most often, is set at 1. In that case, we simply count the number of methods. Besides being simple, this has the advantage that the metric can be applied during design, once the class interface has been decided upon. Note that each entry in the class interface counts as one method, the principle being that each method which requires additional design effort should be counted. For example, different constructors for one and the same operation, as is customary in C++, count as different methods.
Classes in an object-oriented design are related through a subtype--supertype hierarchy. If the class hierarchy is deep and narrow, a proper understanding of a class may require knowledge of many of its superclasses. On the other hand, a wide and shallow inheritance structure occurs when classes are more loosely coupled. The latter situation may indicate that commonality between elements is not sufficiently exploited. DIT is the distance of a class to the root of its inheritance tree. Note that the value of DIT is somewhat language-dependent. In Smalltalk, for example, every class is a subclass of Object, and this increases the value of DIT. A widely accepted heuristic is to strive for a forest of classes, i.e. a collection of inheritance trees of medium height.
NOC counts the number of immediate descendants of a class. If a class has a large number of descendants, this may indicate an improper abstraction of the parent class. A large number of descendants also suggests that the class is to be used in a variety of settings, which will make it more error-prone. The idea thus is that higher values of NOC suggest a higher complexity of the class.
CBO is the main coupling metric for object-oriented systems. Two classes are coupled if a method of one class uses a method or state variable of the other class. The CBO is a count of the number of other classes with which it is coupled. As with the traditional coupling metric, high values of CBO suggest tight bindings with other components, and this is undesirable.
In the definition of CBO, all couplings are considered equal. However, if we look at the different ways in which classes may be coupled, it is reasonable to say that:
	access to state variables is worse than mere parameter passing;
	access to elements of a foreign class is worse than access to elements of a superclass;
	passing many complex parameters is worse than passing a few simple parameters;  messages that conform to Demeters Law  are better than those which dont.
If we view the methods as bubbles, and the couplings as connections between bubbles, CBO simply counts the number of connections for each bubble. In reality, we consider some types of couplings worse than others: some connections are thicker than others, and some connections are to bubbles further away. For the representation condition of measurement theory to hold, these empirical relations should be reflected in the numerical relation system.
Martin (2002) defines coupling measures at the package level:
The afferent coupling ( ) of a package is the number of other packages that depend upon classes within (through inheritance or associations). It indicates the dependence of a package on its environment.
The efferent coupling ( ) of a package is the number of packages that classes within depend upon. It indicates the dependence of the environment on a package.
Adding these numbers together results in a total coupling measure of a package . The ratio indicates the relative dependence of the environment to with respect to the total number of dependencies between P and its environment. If equals zero, does not depend at all on other packages. Then, as well. If on the other hand equals zero, only depends on other packages, and no other package depends on . In that case, . thus can be seen as an instability measure for . Larger values of denote a larger instability of the package.
RFC measures the immediate surroundings of a class. Suppose a class has a collection of methods . Each method from may in turn call other methods, from or any other class. Let be the set of methods called from method . Then the response set of this class is defined as: , i.e. the set of messages that may potentially be executed if a message is sent to an object of class . RFC is defined as the number of elements in the response set. Note that we only count method calls up to one level deep. Larger values of RFC means that the immediate surroundings of a class is larger in size. There is, then, a lot of communication with other methods or classes. This makes comprehension of a class more difficult and increases test time and complexity.
The final object-oriented metric to be discussed is the lack of cohesion of a method. The traditional levels of cohesion express the degree of mutual affinity of the components of a module. It is a measure of the glue that keeps the module together. If all methods of a class use the same state variables, these state variables serve as the glue which ties the methods together. If some methods use a subset of the state variables, while other methods use another subset of the state variables, the class lacks cohesion. This may indicate a flaw in the design, and it may be better to split it into two or more subclasses. LCOM is the number of disjoint sets of methods of a class. Any two methods in the same set share at least one local state variable. The preferred value for LCOM is 0.
There are obviously many more metrics that aim to address the specifics of object-oriented systems. Most of these have not been validated extensively, though. Several experiments have shown that the above set does have some merit. Overall, WMC, CBO, RFC and LCOM have been found to be the more useful quality indicators. These metrics for example were able to predict fault-proneness of classes during design, and were found to have a strong relationship with maintenance effort. The merits of DIT and NCO remain somewhat unclear.
Note that many of these metrics are correlated with class size. One may expect that larger classes have more methods, have more descendants, have more couplings with other classes, etc. El Emam et al. (2001) indeed found that class size has a confounding effect on the values of the above metrics. It thus remains questionable whether these metrics tell more than a plain LOC count.
	12.2	Classical Design Methods
Having discussed the properties of a good system decomposition, we now come to a question which is at least as important: how do you get a good decomposition to start with?
There exist a vast number of design methods, a sample of which is given in table 12.3. These design methods generally consist of a set of guidelines, heuristics, and procedures on how to go about designing a system. They also offer a notation to express the result of the design process. Together these provide a systematic means for organizing and structuring the design process and its products.
 
continued on next page
	Table 12.3	A sample of design methods
 
Decision tables	Matrix representation of complex decision logic at the detailed design level.
E--R	Entity--Relationship Model. Family of graphical techniques for expressing data-relationships; see also chapter 10.
Flowcharts	Simple diagram technique to show control flow at the detailed design level. Exists in many flavors; see (Tripp, 1988) for an overview.
FSM	Finite State Machine. A way to describe a system as a set of states and possible transitions between those states; the resulting diagrams are called state transition diagrams; see also chapter 10.
JSD	Jackson System Development; see section 12.2.3. Successor to, and more elaborate than, JSP; has an object-oriented flavor.
JSP	Jackson Structured Programming. Data-structure-oriented method; see section 12.2.3.
LCP	Logical Construction of Programs, also known as the Warnier-Orr method; data-structure-oriented, similar to JSP.
NoteCards	Example hypertext system. Hypertext systems make it possible to create and navigate through a complex organization of unstructured pieces of text (Conklin, 1987).
OBJ	Algebraic specification method; highly mathematical (Goguen, 1986).
OOD	Object-oriented design; exists in many flavors; see section 12.3.
PDL	Program Design Language; example of a constrained natural language (structured English) to describe designs at various levels of abstraction. Offers the control constructs generally found in programming languages. See (Pintelas and Kallistros, 1989) for an overview.
 
 
Petri nets	Graphical design representation, well-suited for concurrent systems. A system is described as a set of states and possible transitions between those states. States are associated with tokens and transitions are described by firing rules. In this way, concurrent activities can be synchronized (Peterson, 1981).
SA/SD	Structured Analysis/Structured Design. Data flow design technique; see also section 12.2.2.
SA/RT	Extension to Structured Analysis so that real-time aspects can be described (Hatley and Pirbhai, 1988).
SSADM	Structured Systems Analysis and Design Method. A highly prescriptive method for performing the analysis and design stages; UK standard (Downs et al., 1992).
 
For some methods, such as FSM or Petri nets, emphasis is on the notation, while the guidelines on how to tackle design are not very well developed. Methods like JSD, on the other hand, offer extensive prescriptive guidelines as well. Most notations are graphical and somewhat informal, but OBJ uses a very formal mathematical language. Some methods concentrate on the design stage proper, while others are part of a wider methodology covering other life cycle phases as well. Examples of the latter are SSADM and JSD. Finally, some methods offer features that make them especially useful for the design of certain types of application, such as SA/RT (real-time systems) or Petri nets (concurrent systems).
In the following subsections we discuss three classical design methods:
Functional decomposition, which is a rather general approach to system design. It is not tied to any specific method listed in table 12.3. Many different notations can be used to depict the resulting design, ranging from flowcharts or pseudocode to algebraic specifications.
Data flow design, as exemplified by SA/SD.
Design based on data structures, as is done in JSP, LCP and JSD.
A fourth design method, object-oriented design, is discussed in section 12.3. Whereas the above three methods concentrate on identifying the functions of the system, objectoriented design focuses on the data on which the system is to operate. Object-oriented design is the most popular design approach today, not the least because of the omnipresence of UML as a notational device for the outcome of both requirements engineering and design.
	12.2.1	Functional Decomposition
In a functional decomposition the intended function is decomposed into a number of subfunctions that each solve part of the problem. These subfunctions themselves may be further decomposed into yet more primitive functions, and so on. Functional decomposition is a design philosophy rather than a design method. It denotes an overall approach to problem decomposition which underlies many a design method.
With functional decomposition we apply divide-and-conquer tactics. These tactics are analogous to, but not the same as, the technique of stepwise refinement as it is applied in programming-in-the-small. Using stepwise refinement, the refinements tend to be context-dependent. As an example, consider the following pseudo-code algorithm to insert an element into a sorted list:
procedure insert(a, n, x); begin insert x at the end of the list; k:= n + 1;
while element	is not at its proper place do swap element	and element	; k:= k-1
enddo;
end insert;
The refinement of a pseudo-code instruction like element is not at its proper place is done within the context of exactly the above routine, using knowledge of other parts of this routine. In the decomposition of a large system, it is precisely this type of dependency that we try to avoid. The previous section addressed this issue at great length.
During requirements engineering the base machine has been decided upon. This base machine need not be a real machine. It can be a programming language or some other set of primitives that constitutes the bottom layer of the design. During this phase too, the functions to be provided to the user have been fixed. These are the two ends of a rope. During the design phase we try to get from one end of this rope to the other. If we start from the user function end and take successively more detailed design decisions, the process is called top-down design. The reverse is called bottom-up design.
Top-down design Starting from the main user functions at the top, we work down decomposing functions into subfunctions. Assuming we do not make any mistakes on the way down, we can be sure to construct the specified system. With top-down design, each step is characterized by the design decisions it embodies. To be able to apply a pure top-down technique, the system has to be fully described. This is hardly ever the case. Working top-down also means that the earliest decisions are the most important ones. Undoing those decisions can be very costly.
Bottom-up design Using bottom-up design, we start from a set of available base functions. From there we proceed towards the requirements specification through abstraction. This technique is potentially more flexible, especially since the lower layers of the design could be independent of the application and thus have wider applicability. This is especially important if the requirements have not been formulated very precisely yet, or if a family of systems has to be developed. A real danger of the bottom-up technique is that we may miss the target.
In its pure form, neither the top-down nor the bottom-up technique is likely to be used all that often. Both techniques are feasible only if the design process is a pure and rational one. And this is an idealization of reality. There are many reasons why the design process cannot be rational. Some of these have to do with the intangibles of design processes per se, some originate from accidents that happen to befall many a software project. Parnas and Clements (1986) list the following reasons, amongst others:
	Mostly, users do not know exactly what they want and they are not able to tell all they know.
	Even if the requirements are fully known, a lot of additional information is needed. This information is discovered only when the project is under way.
	Almost all projects are subject to change. Changes influence earlier decisions.
	People make errors.
	During design, people use the knowledge they already have, experiences from earlier projects, and the like.
	In many projects we do not start from scratch, but we build from existing software.
Design exhibits a yo-yo character: something is devised, tried, rejected again, new ideas crop up, etc. Designers frequently go about in rather opportunistic ways. They frequently switch from high-level application domain issues to coding and detailed design matters, and use a variety of means to gather insight into the problem to be solved. At most, we may present the result of the design process as if it came about through a rational process.
A general problem with any form of functional decomposition is that it is often not immediately clear along which dimension the system is decomposed. If we decompose along the time-axis, the result is often a main program that controls the order in which a number of subordinate modules is called. In Yourdons classification, the resulting cohesion type is temporal. If we decompose with respect to the grouping of data, we obtain the type of data cohesion exhibited in abstract data types. Both these functional decompositions can be viewed as an instance of some architectural style. Rather than worrying about which dimension to focus on during functional decomposition, you had better opt for a particular architectural style and let that style guide the decomposition.
At some intermediate level, the set of interrelated components comprises the software architecture as discussed in chapter 11. This software architecture is a product which serves various purposes: it can be used to discuss the design with different stakeholders; it can be used to evaluate the quality of the design; it can be the basis for the work breakdown structure; it can be used to guide the testing process, etc. If a software architecture is required, it necessitates a design approach in which, at quite an early stage, each and every component and connection is present. A bottom-up or top-down approach does not meet this requirement, since in both these approaches only part of the solution is available at intermediate points in time.
Parnas (1978) offers the following useful guidelines for a sound functional decomposition:
1.	Try to identify subsystems. Start with a minimal subset and define minimal extensions to this subset.
The idea behind this guideline is that it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to get a complete picture of the system during requirements engineering. People ask too much or they ask the wrong things. Starting from a minimal subsystem, we may add functionality incrementally, using the experience gained with the actual use of the system. The idea is very similar to that of agile approaches, discussed in chapter 3.
2.	Apply the information hiding principle.
3.	Try to define extensions to the base machine step by step. This holds for both the minimal machine and its extensions. Such incremental extensions lead to the concept of a virtual machine. Each layer in the system hierarchy can be viewed as a machine. The primitive operations of this machine are implemented by the lower layers of the hierarchy. This machine view of the module hierarchy nicely maps onto a layered architectural style. It also adds a further dimension to the system structuring guidelines offered in section 12.1.5.
4.	Apply the uses-relation and try to place the dependencies thus obtained in a hierarchical structure.
Obviously, the above guidelines are strongly interrelated. It has been said before that a strictly hierarchical tree structure of system components is often not feasible. A compromise that often is feasible is a layered system structure as depicted in figure 12.7.
The arrows between the various nodes in the graph indicate the uses-relation. Various levels can be distinguished in the structure depicted. Components at a given level only use components from the same, or lower, levels. The layers distinguished in this picture are not the same as those induced by the acyclicity of the graph (as discussed in section 12.1.5) but are rather the result of viewing a distinct set of modules as an abstract, virtual machine. Deciding how to group modules into layers in this way involves considering the semantics of those modules. Lower levels in this hierarchy bring us closer to the real machine on which the system is going to be executed. Higher levels are more application-oriented. The choice of the number of levels in such an architecture is a, problem-dependent, design decision.
 
	Figure 12.7	A layered system structure
This work of Parnas heralds some of the notions that were later recognized as important guiding principles in the field of software architecture. The idea of a minimal subset to which extensions are defined is very similar to the notion of a product-line architecture: a basic architecture from which a family of similar systems can be derived. The layered approach is one of the basic architectural styles discussed in section 11.4.
	12.2.2	Data Flow Design (SA/SD)
The data flow design method originated in the early 1970s with Yourdon and Constantine. In its simplest form, data flow design is but a functional decomposition with respect to the flow of data. A component (module) is a black box which transforms some input stream into some output stream. In data flow design, heavy use is made of graphical representations known as Data Flow Diagrams (DFD) and Structure Charts. Data flow diagrams were introduced as a modeling notation in section 10.1.3.
Data flow design is usually seen as a two-step process. First, a logical design is derived in the form of a set of data flow diagrams. This step is referred to as Structured Analysis (SA). Next, the logical design is transformed into a program structure represented as a set of structure charts. The latter step is called Structured Design (SD). The combination is referred to as SA/SD.
Structured Analysis can be viewed as a proper requirements analysis method insofar it addresses the modeling of some Universe of Discourse. It should be noted that, as data flow diagrams are refined, the analyst performs an implicit (top-down) functional decomposition of the system as well. At the same time, the diagram refinements result in corresponding data refinements. The analysis process thus has design aspects as well.
Structured Design, being a strategy to map the information flow contained in data flow diagrams into a program structure, is a genuine component of the (detailed) design phase.
The main result of Structured Analysis is a series of data flow diagrams. Four types of data entity are distinguished in these diagrams:
External entities are the source or destination of a transaction. These entities are located outside the domain considered in the data flow diagram. External entities are indicated as squares.
Processes transform data. Processes are denoted by circles.
Data flows between processes, external entities and data stores. A data flow is indicated by an arrow. Data flows are paths along which data structures travel.
Data stores lie between two processes. This is indicated by the name of the data store between two parallel lines. Data stores are places where data structures are stored until needed.
We will illustrate the various process steps of SA/SD by analyzing and designing a simple library automation system. The system allows library clients to borrow and return books. It also reports to library management about how the library is used by its clients (for example, the average number of books on loan and authors much in demand).
At the highest level we draw a context diagram. A context diagram is a data flow diagram with one process, denoting the system. Its main purpose is to depict the interaction of the system with the environment (the collection of external entities). For our simple library system this is done in figure 12.8. This diagram has yet to be supplemented by a description of the structure of both the input and output to the central process.
 
	Figure 12.8	Context diagram for library automation
Next, this top-level diagram is further decomposed. For our example, this could lead to the data flow diagram of figure 12.9. In this diagram, we have expanded the
 
	Figure 12.9	Data flow diagram for library automation
central process node of the context diagram. A client request is first analyzed in a process labeled preliminary processing. As a result, one of borrow title or return title is activated. Both these processes update a data store labeled catalog administration. Client requests are logged in a data store log file. This data store is used to produce management reports.
For more complicated applications, various diagrams could be drawn, one for each subsystem identified. These subsystems in turn are further decomposed into diagrams at yet lower levels. We thus get a hierarchy of diagrams. As an example, a possible refinement of the preliminary processing node is given in figure 12.10. In the lower level diagrams also, the external entities are usually omitted.
The top-down decomposition stops when a process becomes sufficiently straightforward and does not warrant further expansion. These primitive processes are
 
	Figure 12.10	Data flow diagram for preliminary processing
described in minispecs. A minispec serves to communicate the algorithm of the process to relevant parties. It may use notations like structured natural language, pseudocode, or decision tables. Example screen layouts can be added to illustrate how the input and output will look. An example minispec for the process labeled process request is given in figure 12.11.
Identification: Process request Description:
1.	Enter type of request
1.1	If invalid, issue a warning and repeat step 1
1.2	If step 1 has been repeated five times, terminate the transaction
2.	Enter book identification
2.1	If invalid, issue a warning and repeat step 2
2.2	If step 2 has been repeated five times, terminate the transaction
3.	Log the client identification, request type and book identification
4.	. . .
	Figure 12.11	Example minispec for process request
The contents of the data flows in a DFD are recorded in a data dictionary. Though this name suggests something grand, it is nothing more than a precise description of the structure of the data. This is often done in the form of regular expressions, like the example in figure 12.12. Nowadays, the static aspects of the data tend to be modeled in ER diagrams; see chapter 10.
borrow-request = client-id book-id return-request = client-id book-id log-data = client-id [borrow return] book-id book-id = author-name title (isbn) [proc series other]
Conventions: [ ] means: include one of the enclosed options; means: AND; () means: enclosed items are optional; options are separated by
	Figure 12.12	Example data dictionary entries
 
	Figure 12.13	From data flow diagram to structure chart
The result of Structured Analysis is a logical model of the system. It consists of a set of DFDs, augmented by descriptions of its constituents in the form of minispecs, formats of data stores, and so on. In the subsequent Structured Design step, the data flow diagrams are transformed into a collection of modules (subprograms) that call one another and pass data. The result of the Structured Design step is expressed in a hierarchical set of structure charts. There are no strict rules for this step. Text books on the data flow technique give guidelines, and sometimes even well-defined strategies, for how to get from a set of data flow diagrams to a hierarchical model for the implementation. These guidelines are strongly inspired by the various notions discussed in section 12.1, most notably cohesion and coupling.
The major heuristic involves the choice of the top-level structure chart. Many data-processing systems are essentially transform-centered. Input is read and possibly edited, a major transformation is done, and the result is output. One way to decide upon the central transformation is to trace the input through the data flow diagram until it can no longer be considered input. The same is done, in the other direction, for the output. The bubble in between acts as the central transform. If we view the bubbles in a DFD as beads, and the data flows as threads, we obtain the corresponding structure chart by picking the bead that corresponds to the central transformation and shaking the DFD.  The processes in the data flow diagram become the modules of the corresponding structure chart and the data flows become module calls. Note that the arrows in a structure chart denote module calls, whereas the arrows in a data flow diagram denote flows of data. These arrows often point in opposite directions; a flow of data from A to B is often realized through a call of B to A. Sometimes it is difficult to select one central transformation. In that case, a dummy root element is added and the resulting Input--Process--Output scheme is of the form depicted in figure 12.13.
Because of the transformation orientation of the structure chart, the relations between modules in the graph have a producer--consumer character. One module produces a stream of data which is then consumed by another module. The control flow is one whereby modules call subordinate modules so as to realize the required transformation. There is a potentially complex stream of information between modules, corresponding to the data flow that is passed between producer and consumer. The major contribution of Structured Design is found in the guidelines that aim to reduce the complexity of the interaction between modules. These guidelines concern the cohesion and coupling criteria discussed in section 12.1.
12.2.3	Design based on Data Structures
The best-known technique for design based on data structures originates with Michael Jackson. The technique is known as Jackson Structured Programming (JSP). Essentials of JSP have been carried over to Jackson System Development (JSD). JSP is a technique for programming-in-the-small and JSD is a technique for programming-in-the-large. We will discuss both techniques in turn.
The basic idea of JSP is that a good program reflects the structure of both the input and the output in all its facets. Given a correct model of these data structures, we may straightforwardly derive the corresponding program from the model. It is often postulated that the structure of the data is much less volatile than the transformations applied to the data. As a consequence, designs that take the data as their starting point should be better too. This same argument is also used in the context of object-oriented analysis and design.
JSP distinguishes elementary and compound components. Elementary components are not further decomposed. There are three types of compound component: sequence, iteration and selection. Compound components are represented by diagrams (also called Jackson diagrams or structure diagrams) or some sort of pseudocode (called structure text or schematic logic). The base forms of both are given in figure 12.14. In the structure text, seq denotes sequencing, itr denotes iteration, sel denotes selection, and alt denotes alternatives.
 
	Figure 12.14	Compound components in Jacksons notation
Most modern programming languages have structures (loops, if-statements and sequential composition) for each of these diagrammatic notations or, for that matter, the corresponding pseudocode for the structure of data. The essence of Jacksons technique is that the structure diagrams of the input and output can be merged, thus yielding the global structure of the program.
To illustrate this line of thought, consider the following fragment from a library system. The system keeps track of which books from which authors are being borrowed (and returned). From this log, we want to produce a report which lists how often each title is borrowed. Using Jacksons notation, the input for this function could be as specified in figure 12.15.  A possible structure for the output is given in figure 12.16.
The program diagram to transform the log into a report is now obtained by merging the two diagrams; see figure 12.17. The structure of the resulting program can be derived straightforwardly from this diagram, and is of the form given in figure 12.18.
This merging of diagrams does not work for the lower levels of our problem: process mutation and its subordinate nodes. The cause is something called a structure clash: the input and output data structures do not really match. The reason is that the input consists of a sequence of mutations. In the output, all mutations for one
 
	Figure 12.15	Log of books borrowed and returned, in JSP notation
given book are taken together. So, the mutations have to be sorted first. We have to restructure the system, for instance as depicted in figure 12.19.
A clear disadvantage of the structure thus obtained is that there is now an intermediate file. Closer inspection shows that we do not really need this file. This is immediately clear if we depict the structure as in figure 12.20.
Here, we may invert component A1 and code it such that it serves as a replacement of component B2. Alternatively (and in this case more likely), we may invert B1 and substitute the result for component A2. In either case, the first-in-first-out type of intermediate file between the two components is removed by making one of the components a subordinate of the other.
This example shows the fundamental issues involved in the use of JSP:
1.	Modeling input and output using structure diagrams,
2.	Merging the diagrams to create the program structure, meanwhile
3.	Resolving possible structure clashes, and finally
 
	Figure 12.16	Report of books borrowed, in JSP notation
4.	Optimizing the result through program inversion.
If we choose a linear notation for the structure diagrams, the result falls into the class of regular expressions. Thus, the expressive power of these diagrams is that of a finite automaton. Some of the structure clashes crop up if the problem cannot be solved by a finite automaton.
Both in the functional decomposition and in the data flow design methods, the problem structure is mapped onto a functional structure. This functional structure is next mapped onto a program structure. In contrast, JSP maps the problem structure onto a data structure and the program structure is derived from this data structure. JSP is not much concerned with the question of how the mapping from problem structure to data structure is to be obtained.
Jackson System Development (JSD) tries to fill this gap. JSD distinguishes three stages in the software development process:
A modeling stage in which a description is made of the real-world problem through the identification of entities and actions;
A network stage in which the system is modeled as a network of communicating concurrent processes;
An implementation stage in which the network of processes is transformed into a sequential design.
 
	Figure 12.17	Result of merging the input and output diagrams
make header until EOF loop process author:
until end of author loop process mutation:
. . .
endloop
endloop.
	Figure 12.18	Top-level structure of the program to produce a report
The first step in JSD is to model the part of reality we are interested in, the Universe of Discourse (UoD). JSD models the UoD as a set of entities, objects in the real world that participate in a time-ordered sequence of actions. For each entity a process
 
	Figure 12.19	Restructuring of the system
 
	Figure 12.20	A different view of the system
is created which models the life cycle of that entity. Actions are events that happen to an entity. For instance, in a library the life cycle of an entity Book could be as depicted in figure 12.21. The life cycle of a book starts when it is acquired. After that it may be borrowed and returned any number of times. The life cycle ends when the book is either archived or disposed of. The life cycle is depicted using process structure diagrams (PSDs). PSDs are hierarchical diagrams that resemble the structure diagrams of JSP, with its primitives to denote concatenation (ordering in time), repetition and selection. PSDs have a pseudocode equivalent called structure text which looks like the schematic logic of JSP.
Process structure diagrams are finite state diagrams. In traditional finite state diagrams, the bubbles (nodes) represent possible states of the entity being modeled while the arrows denote possible transitions between states. The opposite is true for PSDs. In a PSD, nodes denote state transitions and arrows denote states.
Following this line of thought, an entity Member can be described as in figure 12.22: members enter the library system, after which they may borrow and return books until they cease to be a member.
The modeling stage is concerned with identifying entities and the events (actions) that happen to them. These actions collectively constitute the life cycle of an entity.
 
	Figure 12.21	Process structure diagram for the entity Book
As with other design methods, there is no simple recipe to determine the set of entities and actions. The approach generally taken has a linguistic stance. From notes, documentation, interviews and the like, we may draw up a preliminary list of actions and entities. One heuristic is to look for real-world objects with which the system is to interact. Since a library is all about books, an entity Book immediately suggests itself. From statements like members borrow books we may infer that an event Borrow occurs in the life cycle of both books and members. Once such a preliminary list is made up, further reflection should lead to a precisely demarcated life cycle of the entities identified.
Entities are made up of actions. These actions are atomic, i.e. they cannot be further decomposed into subactions. Actions respond to events in the real world. The action Acquire that is part of the life cycle of the entity Book is triggered when a real-world event, the actual acquisition of a book, takes place. In the process structure diagram, actions show up as leaf nodes.
Events are communicated to the system through data messages, called attributes. In a procedural sense these attributes constitute the parameters of the action. For the action Acquire we may have such attributes as ISBN, date-of-acquisition, title and authors.
Entities have attributes as well: local variables that keep information from the past and collectively determine its state. The entity Book for example may retain some or all of the information that was provided upon acquisition (ISBN, title, etc).
 
	Figure 12.22	Process structure diagram for the entity Member
Entities also have two special attributes. First, the identifier attribute uniquely identifies the entity. Second, each entity has an attribute that indicates its status. This attribute can be viewed as a pointer to some leaf node of the process structure diagram.
Each entity can be viewed as a separate, long-running, process. In the library example, each book and each member has its own life cycle. The processes though are not completely independent. During the network stage, the system is modeled as a network of interconnected processes. This network is depicted in a system specification diagram (SSD). JSD has two basic mechanisms for interprocess communication:
An entity may inspect the state vector of another entity. This state vector describes the local state of an entity at some point in time.
An entity may asynchronously pass information to another entity through a datastream.
Recall that the actions Borrow and Return occur in the life cycle of both Book and Member (see figures 12.21 and 12.22). Such common actions create a link between these entities. As a consequence, the life cycles of these entities will be synchronized with respect to these events.
If a member wants to borrow a book, certain information about that book is required. A Member entity may obtain that information by inspecting the state vector of the appropriate Book entity. This type of communication is indicated by
 
the diamond in figure 12.23. In an implementation, state vector communication is usually handled through database access.
If our system is to log information on books being borrowed, we may model this by means of a datastream from an entity Book to an entity Log. A datastream is handled on a FIFO basis; it behaves like the UNIX filter. The notation for the datastream type of communication is given in figure 12.24.
 
	Figure 12.23	State vector communication (SV) between Member and Book
 
	Figure 12.24	Datastream communication (DS) between Book and Log
The final stage of JSD is the implementation stage. In the implementation stage the concurrent model that is the result of the network stage is transformed into an executable system. One of the key concepts for this stage is program inversion: the communication between processes is replaced by a procedure call, so that one process becomes a subordinate of another process. This is very similar to the notion of program inversion as present in JSP.
12.3	Object-Oriented Analysis and Design Methods
The key concepts that play a role in the object-oriented approach to analysis and design have been mentioned already in chapter 10: objects, their attributes and services, and the relationships between objects. It follows quite naturally from the above that the object-oriented approach to systems analysis and design involves three major steps:
1.	identify the objects;
2.	determine their attributes and services;
3.	determine the relationships between objects.
Obviously, these steps are highly interrelated and some form of iteration will be needed before the final design is obtained. The resulting picture of the system as a collection of objects and their interrelationships describes the static structure (decomposition) of the system. This static model is graphically depicted in some variant of the class diagram as described in section 10.3.1.
An object instance is created, updated zero or more times, and finally destroyed. Finite state diagrams depicting the possible states of an object and the transitions between those states are a good help in modeling this life cycle. Object-oriented methods generally use some variant of the state machine diagram of UML to show this dynamic model of the behavior of system components; see section 10.3.2.
Components of the system communicate by sending messages. These messages are part of a task that the system has to perform. We may find out which messages are needed, and in which order they have to be exchanged, by considering typical usage scenarios. Scenario analysis is a requirements elicitation technique. In objectoriented circles, this technique is known as use-case analysis. The resulting model of the communication between system components is depicted in a sequence or communication diagram; see sections 10.3.3 and 10.3.4. These views are also part of the dynamic model.
The guidelines for finding objects and their attributes and services are mostly linguistic in nature, much like the ones mentioned in our discussion of JSD in section 12.2.3. Indeed, the modeling stage of JSD is object-oriented too. The guidelines presented below are loosely based on (Coad and Yourdon, 1991) and (Rumbaugh et al., 1991). Their general flavor is similar to that found in other object-oriented approaches. The global process models of some well-known object-oriented methods are discussed in sections 12.3.1--12.3.2.
The problem statement for a library automation system given in figure 12.25 will serve as an example to illustrate the major steps in object-oriented analysis and design. We will elaborate part of this problem in the text, and leave a number of detailed issues as exercises.
A major guiding principle for identifying objects is to look for important concepts from the application domain. Objects to be found in a library include Books, FileCabinets, Customers, etc. In an office environment, we may have Folders, Letters, Clerks, etc. These domain-specific entities are our prime candidates for objects. They may be real-world objects, like books; roles played, like the customer of a library; organizational units, like a department; locations, like an office; or devices, like a printer. Potential objects can also be found by considering existing classification or assembly (whole-parts) structures. From interviews, documentation, and so on, a first inventory of objects can be made.
 
Problem statement
Design the software to support the operation of a public library. The system has a number of stations for customer transactions. These stations are operated by library employees. When a book is borrowed, the identification card of the client is read. Next, the stations bar code reader reads the books code. When a book is returned, the identification card is not needed and only the books code needs to be read. Clients may search the library catalog from any of a number of PCs located in the library. When doing so, the user is first asked to indicate how the search is to be done: by author, by title, or by keyword.
. . .
Special functionality of the system concerns changing the contents of the catalog and the handling of fines. This functionality is restricted to library personnel. A password is required for these functions. . . .
 
	Figure 12.25	Problem statement for library automation
From the first paragraph of the problem description in figure 12.25, the following list of candidate objects can be deduced, by simply listing all the nouns:
software library
system station customer transaction book library employee identification card client
bar code reader books code
Some objects on this candidate list should be eliminated, though. Software, e.g., is an implementation construct which should not be included in the model at this point in time. A similar fate should befall terms like algorithm or linked list. At the detailed design stage, there may be reasons to introduce (or reintroduce) them as solution-oriented objects.
Vague terms should be replaced by more concrete terms or eliminated. System is a vague term in our candidate list. The stations and PCs will be connected to the same host computer, so we might as well use the notion computer instead of system.
Customer and client are synonymous terms in the problem statement. Only one of them is therefore retained. We must be careful in how we model client and library employee. One physical person may assume both roles. Whether it is useful to model these as distinct objects or as different roles of one object is difficult to decide at this point. We will treat them as separate objects for now, but keep in mind that this may change when the model gets refined.
The term transaction refers to an operation applied to objects, rather than an object in itself. It involves a sequence of actions such as handing an identification card and a book copy to the employee, inserting the identification card in the station, reading the books bar code, and so on. Only if the transactions themselves have features which are important to the system, should they be modeled as objects. For instance, if the system has to produce profile information about client preferences, it is useful to have an object transaction.
The term book is a bit tricky in this context. A book in a library system may denote both a physical copy and an abstract key denoting a particular author, title combination. The former meaning is intended when we speak about the borrowing of a book, while the latter is intended where it concerns entries in the library catalog. Inexperienced designers may equate these interpretations and end up with the wrong system. We are interested (in this part of the system) in modeling book copies.
The last entry to be dropped from the list is books code. This term describes an individual object rather than a class of objects. It should be restated as an attribute of an object, to wit book copy.
Figure 12.26 lists the relationships between objects that can be inferred from the problem statement. These relationships are directly copied from the problem statement, or they are part of the tacit knowledge we have of the domain.
The resulting objects and relationships are included in the initial class diagram of figure 12.27. We have only included the names of the relationships in this diagram. Further adornments, such as cardinality constraints and generalization/specialization information, may be included when the model gets refined.
We next identify the attributes of objects. Attributes describe an instance of an object. Collectively, the attributes constitute the state of the object. Attributes are identified by considering the characteristics that distinguish individual instances, yet are common properties of the instances of an object type. We thereby look for atomic attributes rather than composite ones. For our library customer, we would for example obtain attributes Name and Address rather than a composite attribute NameAndAddress. At this stage, we also try to prevent redundancies in the set of attributes. So rather than having attributes BooksOnLoan and NumberOfBooksOnLoan, we settle for the former only, since the latter can be computed from that attribute.
The major services provided by an object are those that relate to its life cycle. For example, a copy of a book is acquired, is borrowed and returned zero or more times, and finally it goes out of circulation. A person becomes a member of the library and may borrow and return books, reserve titles, change address, pay fines, and so on, until he finally ceases to be a member.
 
From the problem statement:
 
employee operates station station has bar code reader bar code reader reads book copy bar code reader reads identification card
 
Tacit knowledge:
 
library owns computer library owns stations computer communicates with station library employs employee client is member of library client has identification card
 
	Figure 12.26	Relationships inferred from the problem statement
These services concern the state of an object: they read and write the objects attributes. Services that provide information about the state of an object may or may not involve some type of computation. Note that it is always possible to optimize the actual implementation by keeping redundant information in the state as it is maintained by the object. For example, we may decide to include the number of books on loan in the state as implemented, rather than computing it when required. This need not concern us at this stage though. Whether services are actually implemented by computational means or by a simple lookup procedure is invisible to the object that requests the information.
Further insight into which services are required can be obtained by investigating usage scenarios. We may prepare typical dialogs between components of the system in both normal and exceptional situations. For example, we may consider the situation in which a client successfully borrows a book, one in which the clients identification card is no longer valid, one in which he still has to pay an outstanding fine, and so on. A sequence diagram for the normal situation of borrowing a book is shown in figure 12.28. A number of events take place when this interaction takes place. These events will be handled by operations of the objects involved.
Services are but one way through which objects may be related. The relations which give systems a truly object-oriented flavor are those which result from whole--part and generalization--specialization classifications.
Part of the classification of objects may result from the pre-existing real-world classifications that the system is to deal with. Further classification of objects into an object hierarchy involves a search for relations between objects. To start with, we
 
	Figure 12.27	(Part of) the initial object model for a library system
may consider an object as a generalization of other possible objects. For instance, the object Book may be viewed as a generalization of objects Novel, Poetry and ReferenceBook. Whether these specializations are meaningful depends on the problem at hand. If the system does not need to distinguish between novels and poetry, we should not define separate objects for them. The distinction between novels and poetry on the one hand and reference books on the other is sensible, though, if novels and poetry can be borrowed, but reference books cannot.
In a similar way, we may consider similarities between objects, thus viewing them as specializations of a more general object. If our library system calls for objects Book and Journal that have a number of attributes in common, we may introduce a new object Publication as a generalization of these objects. The common attributes are lifted to the object Publication; Book and Journal then inherit these attributes. Note that generalizations should still reflect meaningful real-world entities. There is no point in introducing a generalization of Book and FileCabinet simply because they have a common attribute Location.
The object Publication introduced above is an abstract object. It is an object for
 
	Figure 12.28	Sequence diagram for borrowing a book
which there are no instances. The library only contains instances of objects that are a specialization of Publication, such as Book and Journal. Its function in the object hierarchy is to relate these other objects and to provide an interface description to its users. The attributes and services defined at the level of Publication together constitute the common interface for all its descendants.
The generalization--specialization hierarchy also makes it possible to lift services to higher levels of the hierarchy. Doing so often gives rise to so-called virtual functions. Virtual functions are services of an object for which a (default) implementation is provided which can be redefined by specializations of that object. The notion of virtual functions greatly enhances reusability, since a variant of some object can now be obtained by constructing a specialization of that object in which some services are redefined.
Decisions as to which objects and attributes to include in a design, and how to relate them in the object hierarchy, are highly intertwined. For instance, if an object has one attribute only, it is generally better to include it as an attribute in other objects. Also, the instances of an object should have common attributes. If some attributes are only meaningful for a subset of all instances, then we really have a classification structure. If some books can be borrowed, but others cannot, this is an indication of a classification structure where the object Book has specializations such as Novel and ReferenceBook.
Note also that, over time, the set of attributes of and services provided by an object tends to evolve, while the object hierarchy remains relatively stable. If our library decides to offer an extra service to its customers, say borrowing records, we may simply adapt the set of attributes and extend the set of services for the object Customer.
Object-oriented design can be classified as a middle-out design method. The set of objects identified during the first modeling stages constitutes the middle level of the system. In order to implement these domain-specific entities, lower-level objects are used. These lower-level objects can often be taken from a class library. For the various object-oriented programming languages, quite extensive class libraries already exist. The higher levels of the design constitute the application-dependent interaction of the domain-specific entities.
In the following subsections, we discuss three design methods that typify the evolution of object-oriented analysis and design:
The Booch method, an early object-oriented analysis and design method, with an emphasis on employing a new and rich set of notations.
Fusion, developed at HP, with a much larger emphasis on the various process steps of the method.
The Rational Unified Process (RUP), a full life cycle model associated with UML.
	12.3.1	The Booch Method
The global process model of the method described in (Booch, 1994) is shown in figure 12.29. It consists of four steps, to be carried out in roughly the order specified. The process is iterative, so each of the steps may have to be done more than once. The first cycles are analysis-oriented, while later ones are design-oriented. The blurring of activities in this process model is intentional. Analysis and design activities are assumed to be under opportunistic control. It is therefore not deemed realistic to prescribe a purely rational order for the activities to be carried out.
The first step is aimed at identifying classes and objects. The purpose of this step is to establish the boundaries of the problem and to obtain a first decomposition. During analysis, emphasis is on finding meaningful abstractions from the domain of application. During design, objects from the solution domain may be added. The major outcome of this step is a data dictionary containing a precise description of the abstractions identified.
 
Figure 12.29 The process model of Booch (Source: G. Booch, Object-Oriented Analysis and Design, Benjamin Cummings, 1994. Reproduced with permission.)
The second step is concerned with determining the behavior and attributes of each abstraction, and the distribution of responsibilities over components of the system. Attributes and desired behavior are identified by analyzing typical usage scenarios. As this process proceeds, responsibilities may be reallocated to get a more balanced design, or be able to reuse (scavenge) existing designs. The outcome of this step is a reasonably complete set of responsibilities and operations for each abstraction. The results are documented in the data dictionary and, at a later stage, in interface specifications for each abstraction. The semantics of usage scenarios are captured in sequence and communication diagrams (termed interaction diagram and object diagram, respectively, in (Booch, 1994)).
The third step is concerned with finding relationships between objects. During analysis, emphasis is on finding relationships between abstractions. During design, tactical decisions about inheritance, instantiation, and the like are made. The results are shown in class diagrams, communication diagrams, and so-called module diagrams which show the modular structure of a system.
Finally, the abstractions are refined up to a detailed level. A decision is made about the representation of each abstraction, algorithms are selected, and solution-oriented classes are added where needed.
The most notable characteristics of Boochs method are:
	A rich set of notations: it uses six types of diagram, each with a fairly elaborate vocabulary; as a result, many aspects of a system can be modeled.
	A poor process model: it is difficult to decide when to iterate, and what to do in a specific iteration.
	12.3.2	Fusion
The Fusion method for object-oriented analysis and design has two major phases: analysis and design. Its global process model is shown in figure 12.30.
The analysis phase is aimed at determining the systems objects and their interactions. The static structure is shown in a class diagram (called an object model in Fusion), and documented in a data dictionary. The dynamics are shown in the interface model. The interface model consists of a life cycle model for each object, denoted by a regular expression (i.e., a flat representation of a state machine diagram) and a specification of the semantics of each operation in a pre- and postcondition style. The analysis process is assumed to be an iterative process. This iteration stops when the models are complete and consistent.
Fusions design phase results in four models, which are essentially derived in the order indicated in figure 12.30. Object interaction graphs resemble communication graphs. They describe how objects interact at runtime: what objects are involved in a computation and how they are combined to realize a given specification. Visibility graphs describe how the communications between objects are realized. For each object, it is determined which other objects must be referenced and how. Different kinds of references are distinguished, taking into account aspects like the lifetime of the reference and whether references can be shared. Next, the object model, interaction graphs and visibility graphs are used to derive a description of each class. The operations and the initial set of attributes for each object are established at this stage. Finally, the inheritance relations are decided upon, and depicted in the inheritance graph, which is a class diagram. The class descriptions then are updated to reflect this inheritance structure.
The most notable characteristics of Fusion are:
The large attention paid to the design phase. Fusion defines four models for the design phase and gives detailed guidelines for the kind of things that have to be incorporated in these models.
The version of the method as published in (Coleman et al., 1994) hinges on the availability of a good requirements document. Extensions to this version include the absorption of use cases to drive the analysis process.
As a method, Fusion is very prescriptive. The contrast with the opportunistic approach of Booch is striking. Fusions prescriptiveness might be considered both a strength and a weakness.
 
	Figure 12.30	The process model of Fusion
12.3.3	RUP Revisited
RUP, the Rational Unified Process, is a full process model; see also section 3.3. RUP has a number of workflows, such as a requirements workflow, analysis and design workflow, and test workflow, and four phases: inception, elaboration, construction and transition. Workflows describe the activities to be carried out, while the phases indicate the organization along the time axis. Most workflows extend over most phases.
Here, we discuss the analysis and design workflow, in which the requirements are transformed into a design. RUP is an iterative process, so this transformation is carried out in a number of iterations as well. The first iterations take place in the elaboration phase of RUP. In that phase, the architecture of the system is determined. The RUP way of doing architectural design reasonably fits the global workflow model discussed in section 11.2. In subsequent iterations, concerning the lower-level design, the main activities are termed Analyze behavior and Design components.
The purpose of the Analyze behavior step is to transform the use cases into a set of design elements that together serve as a model of the problem domain. It is about what the system is to deliver. It produces a black box model of the solution. The purpose of the Design elements step is to refine the definitions of the design elements into classes, relationships, interfaces and the like. In this activity, the black box what model is turned into a white box how model.
During both activities, the resulting design is reviewed, and the results thereof are fed back into the next iteration.
Notable characteristics of RUP are:
It is a very complete, iterative model that goes much further than mere analysis and design.
It makes heavy use of the Unified Modeling Language to represent artifacts and views.
Use cases play a central role. They provide thread information from one workflow to another. For example, the analysis and design workflow produces use case realizations, which describe how use cases are actually realized by a collection of interacting objects and classes.
	12.4	How to Select a Design Method
It is not easy to compare the many design methods that exist. They all have their pros and cons. None of them gives us a straightforward recipe as to how to proceed from a list of requirements to a successfully implemented system. We always need some sort of magic in order to get a specific decomposition. The expertise and quality of the people involved have a major impact on the end result of the design process.
Problem solving is based on experience. It is estimated that an expert has over 50 000 chunks of domain-specific knowledge at his disposal. When solving a problem, we try to map the problem at hand onto the knowledge available. The greater this knowledge is, and the more accessible it is, the more successful this process will be.
The prescriptiveness of the design methods differs considerably. The various variants of functional decomposition and the object-oriented design methods rely
 
12.4. HOW TO SELECT A DESIGN METHOD
heavily on the heuristic knowledge of the designers. Jacksons techniques seem to suffer less from this need. Especially if structure clashes do not occur, JSP provides a well-defined framework for how to tackle design. The prescriptive nature of JSP possibly explains to some extent its success, especially in the realm of administrative data-processing. JSD offers similar advantages. Its strict view of describing data structures as a list of events may lead to problems, however, if the data structures do not fit this model. JSP has a static view of the data. More importantly, it does not tell us how to organize the data. As such, this technique seems most suited for problems where the structure of the data has been fixed beforehand. JSD and object-oriented methods offer better support as regards the structuring of data. Though these methods give useful heuristics for the identification of objects, obtaining a well-balanced set of objects is still very much dependent on the skills of the designer.
The data flow technique has a more dynamic view of the data streams that are the base of the system to be constructed. We may often view the bubbles from a data flow diagram as clerks that perform certain transformations on incoming data to produce data for other clerks. The technique seems well-suited for circumstances where an existing manual system is to be replaced by a computerized one. A real danger, though, is that the existing system is just copied, while additional requirements are overlooked.
If we take into account that a substantial part of the cost of software is spent in maintaining that software, it is clear that such factors as flexibility, comprehensibility and modularity should play a crucial role when selecting a specific design technique. The ideas and guidelines of Parnas are particularly relevant in this respect. The object-oriented philosophy incorporates these ideas and is well-matched to current programming languages, which allow for a smoother transition between the different development phases.
Quite a few attempts have been made to classify design methods along various dimensions, such as the products they deliver, the kind of representations used, or their level of formality. A simple but useful framework is proposed in (Blum, 1994). It has two dimensions: an orientation dimension and a model dimension.
In the orientation dimension, a distinction is made between problem-oriented techniques and product-oriented techniques. Problem-oriented techniques concentrate on producing a better understanding of the problem and its solution. Problem-oriented techniques are human-oriented. Their aim is to describe, communicate, and document decisions. Problem-oriented techniques usually have one foot in the requirements engineering domain. Conversely, product-oriented techniques focus on a correct transformation from a specification to an implementation. The second dimension relates to the products, i.e. models, that are the result of the design process. In this dimension, a distinction is made between conceptual models and formal models. Conceptual models are descriptive. They describe an external reality, the Universe of Discourse. Their appropriateness is established through validation. Formal models on the other hand are prescriptive. They prescribe the behavior of the system to be developed. Formal models can be verified.
 
	Figure 12.31	Classification of design techniques
Using this framework, we may classify a number of techniques discussed in this book as in figure 12.31. The four quadrants of this matrix have the following characteristics:
I)	Understand the problem These techniques are concerned with understanding the problem, and expressing a solution in a form that can be discussed with domain specialists (i.e. the users).
II)	Transform to implementation Techniques in this category help to transform a collection of UoD-related concepts into an implementation structure.
III)	Represent properties These techniques facilitate reasoning about the problem and its solution.
IV)	Create implementation units This category contains techniques specifically aimed at creating implementation units such as modules.
The above arguments relate to characteristics of the problem to be solved. There are several other environmental factors that may impact the choice of a particular design technique and, as a consequence, the resulting design (similar arguments hold for the software architecture; see chapter 11):
Familiarity with the problem domain. If the designers are well-acquainted with the type of problem to be solved, a top-down technique or a technique based on data structures may be very effective. If the design is experimental, one will go about it in a more cautious way, and a bottom-up design technique then seems more appropriate.
Designers experience. Designers that have a lot of experience with a given method will, in general, be more successful in applying that method. They
12.4. HOW TO SELECT A DESIGN METHOD
are aware of the constraints and limitations of the method and will be able to successfully bypass the potential problems.
Available tools. If tools are available to support a given design method, it is only natural to make use of them. In general, this also implies that the organization has chosen that design method.
Overall development philosophy. Many design methods are embedded in a wider philosophy which also addresses other aspects of system development, ranging from ways to conduct interviews or reviews to full-scale models of the software life cycle. The organized and disciplined overall approach endorsed by such a development philosophy is an extra incentive for using the design method that goes with it.
12.4.1	Object Orientation: Hype or the Answer?
Moving from OOA to OOD is a progressive expansion of the model.
(Coad and Yourdon, 1991, p. 178)
The transition from OOA to OOD is difficult.
(Davis, 1995)
Strict modeling of the real world leads to a system that reflects todays reality but not necessarily tomorrows. The abstractions that emerge during design are key to making a design flexible.
(Gamma et al., 1995)
The above quotes hint at some important questions still left unanswered in our discussion of object-oriented methods:
	do object-oriented methods adequately capture the requirements engineering phase?
	do object-oriented methods adequately capture the design phase?
	do object-oriented methods adequately bridge the gap between these phases, if such a gap exists?
	are object-oriented methods really an improvement over more traditional methods?
The goal of requirements engineering is to model relevant aspects of the real world, the world in which the application has to operate. Requirements engineering activities concern both capturing knowledge of this world, and modeling it. The language and methods for doing so should be problem-oriented (domain-oriented). They should ease communication with users as well as validation of the requirements by users.
Most object-oriented methods assume that the requirements have been established before the analysis starts. Of the four processes distinguished in chapter 9, elicitation, specification, validation and negotiation, object-oriented methods by and large only cover the requirements specification subprocess. Though many object-oriented methods have incorporated use-case analysis, the purpose thereof primarily is to model the functional behavior of the system rather than to elicit user requirements.
A rather common view of OO proponents is that object-oriented analysis (OOA) and object-oriented design (OOD) are very much the same. OOD simply adds implementation-specific classes to the analysis model. This view, however, can be disputed. OOA should be problem-oriented; its goal is to increase our understanding of the problem. The purpose of design, whether object-oriented or otherwise, is to decide on the parts of a solution, their interaction, and the specification of each of these parts. This difference in scope places OOA and OOD at a different relative distance from a problem and its solution, as shown in figure 12.32.
 
 
	Figure 12.32	The distance between OOA, OOD and a problem and its solution
There are good reasons to distinguish OOA-type activities and OOD-type activities, as is done in Fusion, for example. During design, attention is focused on specifying how to create and destroy objects, on identifying generalizations (abstract, if necessary) of objects in order to promote reuse or maintainability, and so on. An object Publication as a generalization of Book and Journal need not be considered during analysis, since it does not increase our understanding of the domain. On the other hand, an object like identification card may well disappear from the model during design.
Most software development organizations have accumulated a lot of experience in developing software following the traditional, function- or process-oriented style. A lot of legacy software has been developed and documented that way. As a consequence, knowledge of these methods is still required in many an organization.
 
Many organizations have switched to some kind of object-oriented analysis and design approach. Hard evidence of increased productivity or quality has not been determined, though. Several experiments have been done to test the effectiveness of the OO paradigm, and the results do seem to indicate some deeper problems too. For example, in one experiment it was tested how effective object-oriented models are as the main vehicle of communication between the typical customer and the developer (Moynihan, 1996). It was found that the traditional, functional models were easier to understand, provoked more questions and comments, gave a more holistic understanding of the business, and better helped to evaluate likely implementations. In another experiment it was tested whether novice analysts are able to develop requirements more easily with certain methods than with others, and whether they learn to use certain methods more readily than others (Vessey and Conger, 1994). And again, the results were negative for OO: novice analysts were better able to apply the process-oriented method, and significant learning only occurred for the process-oriented method.
In a similar vein, (Arisholm and Sjberg, 2004) found that novice users have fewer problems maintaining systems that have centralized control compared to systems having delegated control. In a centralized control style, one or a few large classes are in control. These large classes coordinate the work of a lot of smaller classes. This resembles the hierarchical main-program-with-subroutines architectural style. In a delegated style, responsibilities are distributed over a larger set of classes. OO proponents usually advocate a delegated control style. It seems one needs a certain maturity to be effective with this style.
The inheritance mechanism of object-orientation needs to be handled with care too, as noted in section 12.1.6. Deep hierarchies require one to comprehend design or implementation units that may be wide apart. Such designs tend to be error prone (Bieman et al., 2001) and more difficult to inspect (Dunsmore et al., 2002), because of the delocalized nature of information in them.
There may well be some truth in the observation that users do not think in objects; they think in tasks. From that point of view, use-case analysis may be seen as one way to introduce a functional view into an otherwise object-oriented approach.
12.5	Design Patterns
A design pattern is a recurring structure of communicating components that solves a general design problem within a particular context. A design pattern differs from an architectural style in that it does not address the structure of a complete system, but only that of a few (interacting) components. Design patterns may thus be termed micro-architectures. On the other hand, a design pattern encompasses more than a single component, procedure or module.
The archetypical example of a design pattern is the Model--View--Controller (MVC) pattern. Interactive systems consist of computational elements as well as elements to display data and handle user input. It is considered good design practice to separate the computational elements from those that handle I/O. This separation of concerns is achieved by the MVC pattern.
MVC involves three components: the Model, the View, and the Controller. The model component encapsulates the systems data as well as the operations on those data. The model component is independent of how the data is represented or how input is done. A view component displays the data that it obtains from the model component. There can be more than one view component. Finally, each view has an associated controller component. A controller handles input actions. Such an input action may cause the controller to send a request to the model, for example to update its data, or to its view, for example to scroll.
For any given situation, the above description has to be considerably refined and made more precise. For instance, a controller may or may not depend on the state of the model. If the controller does not depend on the state of the model, there is a one-way flow of information: the controller signals an input event and notifies the model. If the controller does depend on the state of the model, information flows in the other direction as well. The latter type of dependence can be observed in most word-processing systems for example, where menu entries are made active or inactive depending on the state of the model.
MVC was first used in the Smalltalk environment. Since then it has been applied in many applications. In various graphical user interface platforms, a variant has been applied in which the distinction between the view and the controller has been relaxed. This variant is called the Document--View pattern; see (Kruglinski, 1996).
Design patterns have a number of properties which explain what they offer, as well as why and how they do so:
A pattern addresses a recurring design problem that arises in specific design situations and presents a solution to it. Many software systems include computational elements as well as user-interface elements. For reasons of flexibility, we may wish to separate these as much as possible. MVC offers a solution to precisely this recurring problem.
A pattern must balance a set of opposing forces, i.e. characteristics of the problem that have to be dealt with in its solution. For example, in interactive applications we want to be able to present information in different ways, changes to the data must be reflected immediately in all views affected by these changes, and different look and feel interfaces should not affect the application code. MVC seeks to balance all these forces.
Patterns document existing, well-proven design experience. Patterns are not invented; they evolve with experience. They reflect best practices. MVC, for example, is used in various application frameworks as well as in scores of interactive systems.
Patterns identify and specify abstractions above the level of single components. MVC has three, interacting components which together solve a given problem.
Patterns provide a common vocabulary and understanding for design principles. By now, MVC has become a widely known label for a certain solution to a certain problem. We may use the term in conversation and writing much as we use terms like quicksort or Gauss interpolation. Patterns thus become part of our language for describing software designs.
Patterns are a means of documentation. As with software architectures, patterns both describe and prescribe things. Descriptively, patterns offer a way to document your software, for example by simply using pattern names in its documentation. Prescriptively, pattern names give users hints as to how to extend and modify software without violating the patterns vision. If your system employs MVC, computational aspects are strictly separated from representational aspects, and you know that this separation must be maintained during the systems evolution.
Patterns support the construction of software with defined properties. On the one hand, MVC offers a skeleton for the construction of interactive systems. MVC however also addresses certain non-functional requirements, such as flexibility and changeability of user interfaces. These non-functional requirements often constitute the major problem directly addressed by the pattern.
When describing patterns it is customary to use a schema similar to that used for describing architectural styles. The main entries of such a schema therefore are:
	context: the situation giving rise to a design problem,  problem: a recurring problem arising in that situation, and
	solution: a proven solution to that problem.
We will illustrate design patterns by sketching a possible application of two such patterns in a library automation system.
Suppose our library system involves a central database and a number of users, some of which are based at remote sites. We wish to optimize these remote accesses, for example by using a cache. However, we do not wish to clutter the application code with code that handles such optimizations. The Proxy pattern addresses this problem. In the Proxy pattern, a client does not directly address an original. Rather, the client addresses a proxy, a representative of that original. This proxy shields the non-application specific aspects, like the optimization through a cache in the above example. This Proxy pattern can be described as in figure 12.33 .
The Proxy pattern exists in many variants. The variant discussed above could be termed a Cache Proxy: emphasis is on sharing results from remote components. Other variants are: the Remote Proxy (which shields network access, inter-process
 
Context A client needs services from another component. Though direct access is possible, this may not be the best approach.
	Problem We	do	not	want	to	hard-code	access	to	a	component	into	a	client.
Sometimes, such direct access is inefficient; in other cases it may be unsafe. This inefficiency or insecurity is to be handled by additional control mechanisms, which should be kept separate from both the client and the component to which it needs access.
Solution The client communicates with a representative rather than the component itself. This representative, the proxy, also does any additional pre- and postprocessing that is needed.
 
	Figure 12.33	The Proxy pattern
communication, and so on), the Protection Proxy (protection from unauthorized access) and the Firewall Proxy (protection of local clients from the outside world). World Wide Web servers typically use a Firewall Proxy pattern to protect users from the outside world. Other example uses of the Proxy pattern can be found in frameworks for object-based client/server systems, such as the Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) and Microsofts DCOM (Lewandowski, 1998).
Most users of the library system are incidental users for which we want a friendly interface, including powerful undo facilities. On the other hand, experienced library employees want a user interface with keyboard shortcuts for most commands. Furthermore, we want to be able to log user requests for later analysis, for example to find out which authors are much in demand. We want to separate these extras from the actual application code. The Command Processor pattern addresses this issue. Example uses of the Command Processor pattern can be found in user interface toolkits like ET++ and MacApp. Its characteristics are given in figure 12.34 .
Applications typically involve a mixture of details that pertain to different realms, such as the application domain, the representation of data to the user, the access to a remote compute server, and so on. If these details are mixed up in the software, the result will be difficult to comprehend and maintain.
Expert designers have learned to separate such aspects so as to increase the maintainability, flexibility, adaptability (in short, the quality) of the systems they design. If needed, they introduce some intermediate abstract entity to bridge aspects of a solution they wish to keep separate. The Proxy and Command Processor patterns, as well as many other design patterns found in (Gamma et al., 1995) and (Buschmann et al., 1996), offer elegant and flexible solutions to precisely these divide-and-conquer type design situations.
 
Context User interfaces which must be flexible or provide functionality that goes beyond the direct handling of user functions. Examples are undo facilities or logging functions.
Problem We want a well-structured solution for mapping an interface to the internal functionality of a system. All extras which have to do with the way user commands are input, additional commands such as undo or redo, and any non-application-specific processing of user commands, such as logging, should be kept separate from the interface to the internal functionality.
Solution A separate component, the command processor, takes care of all commands. The command processor component schedules the execution of commands, stores them for later undo, logs them for later analysis, and so on. The actual execution of the command is delegated to a supplier component within the application.
 
	Figure 12.34	The Command Processor pattern
Patterns describe common practices that have proven useful. Antipatterns describe recurring practices that have proven to generate problems. Next to collections of patterns, people have developed collections of mistakes often made, and described them as antipatterns. Knowledge of antipatterns is useful during design to prevent common pitfalls, and during evolution to improve an evolving design. In the latter case, one actually searches for antipatterns and next applies a technique called refactoring to improve the design; see also chapter 14. Descriptions of antipatterns usually include the refactoring remedy. Some well-known antipatterns are:
The God Class. In this situation, there is one central class that is in control and holds most responsibilities. It is linked to a lot of other classes that execute relatively simple tasks. It is also known as The Blob. When such a design is refactored, responsibilities are more evenly distributed. Note though that we previously observed that centralized designs are often more easily comprehended by novices.
Lava flow. At the code level, this amounts to dead code. Following the slogan If it aint broken, dont touch it, obsolete code and obsolete design elements may be dragged along indefinitely.
Poltergeists. These are classes that have limited responsibilities and usually live shortly. Their role often is to just start up other processes.
Golden Hammer. This occurs when an available solution is applied to a problem that it does not really fit (If the only available tool is a hammer, everything else is a nail). This antipattern is common practice when organizations feel they have to use database package X or interface toolkit Y, simply because they have a license, or because their employees have deep knowledge of that technology. At the level of an individual designer, it shows up as the obsessive use of a small set of patterns.
Stovepipe. This phenomenon occurs if multiple systems are developed independently, and each one uses its own set of technologies for the user interface, database, platform, and the like. Integration and cooperation then becomes difficult. Such a situation is often encountered when organizations merge or different organizations link their information systems in a chain. At a more local level it occurs if developers or design teams reinvent the wheel.
Swiss Army Knife. This is an excessively complex class interface. It occurs when a designer wants to make a class as general and reusable as possible.
	12.6	Design Documentation
A requirements specification is developed during requirements engineering. That document serves a number of purposes. It specifies the users requirements and as such it often has legal meaning. It is also the starting point for the design and thus serves another class of user.
The same applies to the design documentation. The description of the design serves different users, who have different needs. A proper organization of the design documentation is therefore very important.
IEEE Standard 1016 discusses guidelines for the description of a design. This standard mainly addresses the kind of information needed and its organization. For the actual description of its constituent parts any existing design notation can be used.
Barnard et al. (1986) distinguishes between seven user roles for the design documentation:
1.	The project manager needs information to plan, control and manage the project. He must be able to identify each system component and understand its purpose and function. He also needs information to make cost estimates and define work packages.
2.	The configuration manager needs information to be able to assemble the various components into one system and to control changes.
3.	The designer needs information about the function and use of each component and its interfaces to other components.
4.	The programmer must know about algorithms to be used, data structures, and the kinds of interaction with other components.
 
12.6. DESIGN DOCUMENTATION
5.	The unit tester must have detailed information about components, such as algorithms used, required initialization, and data needed.
6.	The integration tester must know about relations between components and the function and use of the components involved.
7.	The maintenance programmer must have an overview of the relations between components. He must know how the user requirements are realized by the various components. When changes are to be realized, he assumes the role of the designer.
In IEEE Standard 1016, the project documentation is described as an information model. The entities in this model are the components identified during the design stage. We used the term modules for these entities. Each of these modules has a number of relevant attributes, such as its name, function, and dependencies. We may now construct a matrix in which it is indicated which attributes are needed for which user roles. This matrix is depicted in figure 12.35.
 
	Attributes	User roles
	1	2	3	4	5	6	7
 
Identification
Type
Purpose
Function
Subordinates
Dependencies
Interface
Resources
Processing
Data
 
Figure 12.35 User roles and attributes (Source: H.J. Barnard et al, A recommended practice for describing software designs: IEEE Standards Project 1016, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering SE-12, 2, Copyright 1986, IEEE.)
IEEE Standard 1016 distinguishes ten attributes. These attributes are minimally required in each project. The documentation about the design process is strongly related to the above design documentation. The design process documentation includes information pertaining to, among others, the design status, alternatives that have been rejected, and revisions that have been made. It is part of configuration control, as discussed in chapter 4. The attributes from IEEE Standard 1016 are:
Identification: the components name, for reference purposes. This name must be unique.
Type: the kind of component, such as subsystem, procedure, module, file.
Purpose: what is the specific purpose of the component. This entry will refer back to the requirements specification.
Function: what does the component accomplish. For a number of components, this information will occur in the requirements specification.
Subordinates: which components the present entity is composed of. It identifies a static is-composed-of relation between entities.
Dependencies: a description of the relationships with other components. It concerns the uses-relation, see section 12.1.5, and includes more detailed information on the nature of the interaction (including common data structures, order of execution, parameter interfaces, and the like).
Interface: a description of the interaction with other components. This concerns both the method of interaction (how to invoke an entity, how communication is achieved through parameters) and rules for the actual interaction (encompassing things like data formats, constraints on values and the meaning of values).
Resources: the resources needed. Resources are entities external to the design, such as memory, printers, or a statistical library. This includes a discussion of how to solve possible race or deadlock situations.
Processing: a description of algorithms used, way of initialization, and handling of exceptions. It is a refinement of the function attribute.
Data: a description of the representation, use, format and meaning of internal data.
Figure 12.35 shows that different users have different needs as regards design documentation. A sound organization of this documentation is needed so that each user may quickly find the information he is looking for.
It is not necessarily advantageous to incorporate all attributes into one document: each user gets much more than the information needed to play his role. However, it is not necessarily advantageous to provide separate documentation for each user role: in that case, some items will occur three or four times, which is difficult to handle and complicates the maintenance of the documentation.
In IEEE 1016 the attributes have been grouped into four clusters. The decomposition is made such that most users need information from only one cluster, while these clusters contain a minimum amount of superfluous information for that user. This decomposition is given in table 12.4. It is interesting to note that each cluster has its own view on the design. Each such view gives a complete description, thereby
12.6. DESIGN DOCUMENTATION
concentrating on certain aspects of the design. This may be considered an application of the IEEE recommended practice for architectural descriptions IEEE (2000) long before that standard was developed.
The decomposition description describes the decomposition of the system into modules. Using this description we may follow the hierarchical decomposition and as such describe the various abstraction levels.
The dependencies description gives the coupling between modules. It also sums up the resources needed. We may then derive how parameters are passed and which common data are used. This information is helpful when planning changes to the system and when isolating errors or problems in resource usage.
The interface description tells us how functions are to be used. This information constitutes a contract between different designers and between designers and programmers. Precise agreements about this are especially needed in multi-person projects.
The detail description gives internal details of each module. Programmers need these details. This information is also useful when composing module tests.
Table 12.4 Views on the design (Source: H.J. Barnard et al, A recommended practice for describing software designs: IEEE Standards Project 1016, IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering SE-12, 2, Copyright 1986, IEEE.)
Design view	Description	Attributes	User roles
Decomposition	Decomposition of the	system	into modules	Identification,
type,	purpose, function, subcomponents	Project manager
Dependencies	Relations between modules and between resources	Identification,
type,	purpose,
dependencies, resources	Configuration manager, maintenance programmer, integration tester
Interface	How to use modules	Identification,
function,	interfaces	Designer, integration tester
Detail	Internal details of modules	Identification, computation, data	Module	tester, programmer
	12.7	Verification and Validation
Errors made at an early stage are difficult to repair and incur high costs if they are not discovered until a late stage of development. It is therefore necessary to pay extensive attention to testing and validation issues during the design stage.
The way in which the outcome of the design process can be subject to testing strongly depends upon the way in which the design is recorded. If some formal specification technique is used, the resulting specification can be tested formally. It may also be possible to do static tests, such as checks for consistency. Formal specifications may sometimes be executed, which offers additional ways to test the system. Such prototypes are especially suited to test the user interface. Users often have little idea of the possibilities to be expected and a specification-based prototype offers good opportunities for aligning users requirements and designers ideas.
Often, the design is stated in less formal ways, limiting the possibilities for testing to forms of reading and critiquing text, such as inspections and walkthroughs. However, such design reviews provide an extremely powerful means for assessing designs.
During the design process the system is decomposed into a number of modules. We may develop test cases based on this process. These test cases may be used during functional testing at a later stage. Conversely, the software architecture can be used to guide the testing process. A set of scenarios of typical or anticipated future usage can be used to test the quality of the software architecture.
A more comprehensive discussion of the various test techniques is given in chapter 13.
	12.8	Summary
Just like designing a house, designing software is an activity which demands creativity and a fair dose of craftsmanship. The quality of the designer is of paramount importance in this process. Mediocre designers will not deliver excellent designs.
The essence of the design process is that the system is decomposed into parts that each have less complexity than the whole. Some form of abstraction is always used in this process. We have identified several guiding principles for the decomposition of a system into modules. These principles result in desirable properties for the outcome of the design process, a set of modules with mutual dependencies:
Modules should be internally cohesive, i.e. the constituents of a module should belong together and be friends. By identifying different levels of cohesion, a qualitative notion of module cohesion is obtained.
The interfaces between modules should be as thin as possible. Again, various levels of module coupling have been identified, allowing for an assessment of mutual dependencies between modules.
12.8. SUMMARY
Each module should hide one secret. Information hiding is a powerful design principle, whereby each module is characterized by a secret which it hides from its environment. Abstract data types are a prime example of the application of this principle.
The structure of the system, depicted as a graph whose nodes and edges denote modules and dependencies between modules, respectively, should have a simple and regular shape. The most constrained form of this graph is a tree. In a less constrained form the graph is acyclic, in which case the set of modules can be split into a number of distinct layers of abstraction.
Abstraction is central to all of these features. In a properly-designed system we should be able to concentrate on the relevant issues and ignore the irrelevant ones. This is an essential prerequisite for comprehending a system, for implementing parts of it successfully without having to consider design decisions made elsewhere, and for implementing changes locally, thus allowing for a smooth evolution of the system.
The above features are highly interrelated and reinforce one another. Information hiding results in modules with high cohesion and low coupling. Cohesion and coupling are dual characteristics. A clear separation of concerns results in a neat design structure.
We have discussed several measures to quantify properties of a design. The most extensive research in this area concerns complexity metrics. These complexity metrics concern both attributes of individual modules (called intra-modular attributes) and attributes of a set of modules (called inter-module attributes).
A word of caution is needed, though. Software complexity is a very illusive notion, which cannot be captured in a few simple numbers. Different complexity metrics measure along different dimensions of what is perceived as complexity. Also, large values for any such metric do not necessarily imply a bad design. There may be good reasons to incorporate certain complex matters into one component.
A judicious and knowledgeable use of multiple design metrics is a powerful tool in the hands of the craftsman. Thoughtless application, however, will not help. To paraphrase Gunning, the inventor of the fog index (a popular readability measure for natural language prose): design metrics can cause harm in misuse.
There exist a great many design methods. They consist of a number of guidelines, heuristics and procedures on how to approach designing a system and notations to express the result of that process. Design methods differ considerably in their prescriptiveness, formality of notation, scope of application, and extent of incorporation in a more general development paradigm. Several tentative efforts have been made to compare design methods along different dimensions.
We discussed four design methods in this chapter:
	functional decomposition,
	data flow design,
	data structure design, and
	object-oriented design.
The first three design methods have been around longest. Object-oriented analysis and design came later, and this is now the most widely used approach, partly caused also by the popularity of the notations of the Unified Modeling Language (UML), its associated tools, and full-scale development methods like RUP.
Proponents of object-oriented methods have claimed a number of advantages of the object-oriented approach over the more traditional, function-oriented, approaches to design:
The object-oriented approach is more natural. It fits the way we view the world around us. The concepts that show up in the analysis model have a direct counterpart in the UoD being modeled, thus providing a direct link between the model and the world being modeled. This makes it easier for the client to comprehend the model and discuss it with the analyst.
The object-oriented approach focuses on structuring the problem rather than any particular solution to it. This point is closely related to the previous one. In designs based on the functional paradigm the modules tend to correspond to parts of a solution to the problem. It may then not be easy to relate these modules to the original problem. The result of an object-oriented analysis and design is a hierarchy of objects with their associated attributes which still resembles the structure of the problem space.
The object-oriented approach provides for a smoother transition from requirements analysis to design to code. In our discussion of the object-oriented approach it is often difficult to strictly separate UoD modeling aspects from design aspects. The object hierarchy that results from this process can be directly mapped onto the class hierarchy of the implementation (provided the implementation language is object-oriented too). The attributes of objects become encapsulated by services provided by the objects in the implementation.
The object-oriented approach leads to more flexible systems that are easier to adapt and change. Because the real-world objects have a direct counterpart in the implementation, it becomes easy to link change requests to the corresponding program modules. Through the inheritance mechanism, changes can often be realized by adding another specialized object rather than through tinkering with the code. For example, if we wish to extend our system dealing with furniture by adding another type of chair, say armchair, we do so by defining a new object ArmChair, together with its own set of attributes, as another specialization of Chair.
The object-oriented approach promotes reuse by focusing on the identification of real-world objects from the application domain. In contrast, more traditional
12.8. SUMMARY
approaches focus on identifying functions. In an evolving world, the objects tend to be stable, while the functions tend to change. For instance, in an office environment the functions performed are likely to change with time, but there will always be letters, folders, and so on. Thus, an object-oriented design is less susceptible to changes in the world being modeled.
The inheritance mechanism adds to reusability. New objects can be created as specializations of existing objects, inheriting attributes from the existing objects. At the implementation level, this kind of reuse is accomplished through code sharing. The increasing availability of class libraries contributes to this type of code reuse.
Objects in an object-oriented design encapsulate abstract data types. As such, an object-oriented design potentially has all the right properties (information hiding, abstraction, high cohesion, low coupling, etc).
The object-oriented approach, however, does not by definition result in a good design. It is a bit too naive to expect that the identification of domain-specific entities is all there is to good design. The following issues must be kept in mind:
There are other objects besides the ones induced by domain concepts. Objects that have to do with system issues such as memory management or error recovery do not naturally evolve from the modeling of the UoD. Likewise, hypothetical objects that capture implicit knowledge from the application domain may be difficult to identify.
The separation of concerns that results from the encapsulation of both state and behavior into one component need not be the one that is most desirable. For example, for many an object it might be necessary to be able to present some image of that object to the user. In a straightforward application of the object-oriented method, this would result in each object defining its own ways for doing so. This, however, is against good practices of system design, where we generally try to isolate the user interface from the computational parts. A clearly identifiable user interface component adds to consistency and flexibility.
With objects too, we have to consider the uses relation. An object uses another object if it requests a service from that other object. It does so by sending a message. The bottom-up construction of a collection of objects may result in a rather loosely-coupled set, in which objects freely send messages to other objects. With a nod at the term spaghetti-code to denote overly complex control patterns in programs, this is known as the ravioli problem (or antipatern). If objects have a complicated usage pattern, it is difficult to view one object without having to consider many others as well.
A design pattern is a recurring structure of communicating components that solves a general design problem within a particular context. A design pattern thus encompasses more than a single component. It involves some, usually 2--5, communicating components which together solve a problem. The problem that the pattern solves is a general, recurring one, which can be characterized by the context in which it arises. A design pattern differs from an architectural style in that it does not address the structure of a complete system, but only that of a few (interacting) components. Design patterns may thus be termed micro-architectures. Not surprisingly, the good things about design patterns are essentially the same as those listed for software architectures in chapter 11.
Design patterns describe best practices. They represent the collective experience of some of the most experienced and successful software designers. Likewise, antipatterns describe widely shared bad experiences. The description of both patterns and antipatterns, as found in textbooks, is the result of endless carving and smoothing. Some are the outcome of writers workshops, a format commonly used to review literature, suggesting that we should review software literature with a profoundness like that used to review poetry (as a consequence, these writers workshops are also known as workers write shops).
The distinction between the notions software architecture and design pattern is by no means sharp. Some authors for example use the term architectural pattern to denote the architectural styles we discussed in section 11.4. The notions application framework and idiom are generally used to denote a software architecture and design pattern, respectively, at a more concrete, implementation-specific level. But again, the distinction is not sharp.
Finally, the design itself must also be documented. IEEE Standard 1016 may serve as a guideline for this documentation. It lists a number of attributes for each component of the design. These attributes may be clustered into four groups, each of which represents a certain view on the design. This resembles the way IEEE 1471 advocates to document a software architecture.
Unfortunately, the design documentation typically describes only the design result and not the process that led to that particular result. Yet, information about choices made, alternatives rejected, and deliberations on the design decisions is a valuable additional source of information when a design is to be implemented, assessed, or changed.
	12.9	Further Reading
Budgen (2003) is a good textbook on software design. I found the software as a wicked problem analogy in that text. Bergland and Gordon (1981) and Freeman and Wasserman (1983) are compilations of seminal articles on software design. For an interesting discussion on the Scandinavian approach to system development, see (Floyd et al., 1989) or (CACM, 1993a). Wieringa (1998) provides an extensive survey of both classical and object-oriented design methods and their notations.
The classic text on Structured Analysis and Design is (Yourdon and Constantine, 1975). Other names associated with the development of SA/SD are DeMarco
 
(DeMarco, 1979) and Gane and Sarson (Gane and Sarson, 1979).
For a full exposition of JSP, the reader is referred to (Jackson, 1975) or (King, 1988). JSP is very similar to a method developed by J.-D. Warnier in France at about the same time (Warnier, 1974). The latter is known as Logical Construction of Programs (LCP) or the Warnier--Orr method, after Ken Orr who was instrumental in the translation of Warniers work. For a full exposition of JSD, see (Jackson, 1983), (Cameron, 1989) or (Sutcliffe, 1988). The graphical notations used in this chapter are those of (Sutcliffe, 1988).
Booch method for object-oriented analysis and design is discussed in (Booch, 1994). Fusion is described in (Coleman et al., 1994). Updates to this 1994 version can be found in (Coleman, 1996). RUP is discussed in (Kruchten, 2003). A critical discussion of the differences and similarities between object-oriented analysis and object-oriented design is given in (Davis, 1995) and (Hdalsvik and Sindre, 1993).
Fenton and Pfleeger (1996) presents a rigorous approach to the topic of software metrics. The authors explain the essentials of measurement theory and illustrate these using a number of proposed metrics (including those for complexity, quality assessment, and cost estimation).
Cohesion and coupling were introduced in (Yourdon and Constantine, 1975). Efforts to objectify these notions can be found in (Offutt et al., 1993), (Patel et al., 1992) and(Xia, 2000). Darcy (2005) describes empirical studies to validate the importance of weak coupling and strong cohesion.
Halsteads method, software science, is described in (Halstead, 1977) and (Fitzsimmons and Love, 1978). Positive evidence of its validity is reported in (Curtis et al., 1979) and (Elshoff, 1976). A good overview of the criticism of this method (as well as McCabes cyclomatic complexity and Henri and Kafuras information flow metric) is given in (Shepperd and Ince, 1993). McCabes cyclomatic complexity is introduced in (McCabe, 1976). In most discussions of this metric, the wrong formula is used; see exercise 24 or (Henderson Sellers, 1992). Discussions in favor of using a (cyclomatic) complexity density metric can be found in (Mata-Toledo and Gustafson, 1992) and (Hops and Sherif, 1995).
Definitions of the object-oriented metrics introduced in section 12.1.6 can be found in (Chidamber and Kemerer, 1994). A critical assessment of these metrics is given in (Hitz and Montazeri, 1996) and (Churcher and Shepperd, 1995). To meet some of this criticism, we have adopted the definition of LCOM, as suggested in (Li and Henry, 1993). Experiments to validate the Chidamber--Kemerer metrics suite are reported in (Succi et al., 2003), (Darcy and Kemerer, 2005) and (Gyimo thy et al., 2005).
Design patterns have their origin in the work of Cunningham and Beck, who developed patterns for user interfaces in Smalltalk, such as no more than three panes per window (Power and Weiss, 1987, p. 16). MVC was first used in the Smalltalk environment (Krasner and Pope, 1988). Since that time, the topic has drawn a lot of attention, especially in object-oriented circles. A major collection of design patterns was published by the Gang of Four in 1995 (Gamma et al., 1995). Another good collection of design patterns can be found in (Buschmann et al., 1996). The latter text has a somewhat less object-oriented perspective than (Gamma et al., 1995). Brown et al. (1998) describes a collection of well-known antipatterns. Since 1994, there has been an annual conference on Pattern Languages of Programming (PLOP). The format for describing patterns has not only been used for design patterns; there are also collections of analysis patterns, process patterns, test patterns, etc.
Exercises
1.	What is the difference between procedural abstraction and data abstraction?
2.	List and explain Yourdon and Constantines seven levels of cohesion.
3.	Explain the notions cohesion and coupling.
4.	In what sense are the various notions of coupling technology-dependent?
5.	What is the essence of information hiding?
6.	Give an outline of Halsteads software science.
7.	Determine the cyclomatic complexity of the following program:
no 6:= true; sum:= 0; for i to no of courses do if grade[i]	7 then no 6:= false endif; sum:= sum + grade[i]
endfor;
average:= sum / no of courses;
	if average	8 and no 6
then print(with distinction)
endif;
8.	Would the cyclomatic complexity be any different if the last if-statement were written as follows:
if average 8 then if no 6
then print(with distinction)
endif
endif;
Does this concur with your own ideas of a control complexity measure, i.e. does it fulfill the representation condition?
9.	Give the formula and a rationale for the information flow complexity metric.
10.	Is cyclomatic complexity a good indicator of system complexity?
11.	Draw the call graphs for a non-trivial program you have written, and determine its tree impurity. Does the number obtained agree with our intuitive idea about the quality of the decomposition?
12.	Compute Henri and Kafuras information flow metric for the design of two systems you have been involved in. Do these numbers agree with our intuitive understanding?
13.	Why is DIT -- the depth of a class in the inheritance tree -- a useful metric to consider when assessing the quality of an object-oriented system?
14.	What does RFC -- Response For a Class -- measure?
15.	How does the Law of Demeter relate to the maintainability of object-oriented systems?
16.	Discuss the relative merits and drawbacks of deep and narrow versus wide and shallow inheritance trees.
17.	What is functional decomposition?
18.	Give a global sketch of the Data Flow Design method.
19.	Explain what a structure clash is in JSP.
20.	What is the main difference between problem-oriented and product-oriented design methods?
21.	Discuss the general flavor of RUPs Analysis and Design workflow.
22.	What are the differences between object-oriented design and the simple application of the information hiding principle?
23.	What are the properties of a design pattern?
24.	Make it plausible that the formula for the cyclomatic complexity should read rather than . (Hint: consider the following program:
begin if A then B else C endif;
call P;
print(done) end;
procedure P; begin if X then Y else Z endif
end P;
Draw the flow graph for this program as well as for the program obtained by substituting the body of procedure P inline. Determine the cyclomatic complexity of both variants, using both formulae. See also (Henderson Sellers, 1992).)
25.	Write the design documentation for a project you have been involved in, following IEEE 1016.
26.	Discuss the pros and cons of:
	functional decomposition,
	data flow design,
	design based on data structures, and
	object-oriented design for the design of each of:
	a compiler,
	a patient monitoring system, and  a stock control system.
27.	Discuss the possible merits of those design techniques with respect to reusability.
28.	Augment IEEE Standard 1016 such that it also describes the design rationale. Which user roles are in need of this type of information?
29.	According to (Fenton and Pfleeger, 1996), any tree impurity metric should have the following properties:
a.	if and only if	is a tree;
b.	if differs from only by the insertion of an extra arc;
c.	For let denote the number of arcs in and the number of nodes in . Then if and , then
.

d. For all graphs , where = number of nodes of and is the (undirected) complete graph of nodes.
Give an intuitive rationale for these properties. Show that the tree impurity metric discussed in section 12.1.5 has these properties.
30.	Extend the object model of figure 12.27 such that it also models user queries to the catalog.
31.	Extend the model from the previous exercise such that it also includes the attributes and services of objects.
32.	Write an essay on the differences and similarities of analysis and design activities in object-oriented analysis and design.
33.	Why would object-oriented design be more natural than, say, data flow design?
34.	Discuss the assertion The view that object-oriented methods make change easy is far too simplistic. Consult (Lubars et al., 1992), who found that changes to object models were fairly localized, whereas changes to behavior models had more far-reaching consequences.
35.	The Document--View pattern relaxes the separation of view and controller in MVC. Describe the Document--View pattern in terms of the context in which it arises, the problem addressed, and its solution. Compare your solution with the Observer pattern in (Gamma et al., 1995, p. 293).
36.	How do design patterns impact the quality of a design?
 
13
Software Testing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To be aware of the major software testing techniques
To see how different test objectives lead to the selection of different testing techniques
To appreciate a classification of testing techniques, based on the objectives they try to reach
To be able to compare testing techniques with respect to their theoretical power as well as practical value
To understand the role and contents of testing activities in different life cycle phases
To be aware of the contents and structure of the test documentation
To be able to distinguish different test stages
To be aware of some mathematical models to estimate the reliability of software Testing should not be confined to merely executing a system to see whether a given input yields the correct output. During earlier phases, intermediate products can, and should, be tested as well. Good testing is difficult. It requires careful planning and documentation. There exist a large number of test technieques. We discuss the major classes of test techniques with their characteristics.
	Suppose you are asked to answer the kind of questions posed in	(Baber, 1982):
	Would you trust a completely-automated nuclear power plant?
	Would you trust a completely-automated pilot whose software was written by yourself? What if it was written by one of your colleagues?
	Would you dare to write an expert system to diagnose cancer? What if you are personally held liable in a case where a patient dies because of a malfunction of the software?
You will (probably) have difficulties answering all these questions in the affirmative. Why? The hardware of an airplane probably is as complex as the software for an automatic pilot. Yet, most of us board an airplane without any second thoughts.
As our societys dependence on automation ever increases, the quality of the systems we deliver increasingly determines the quality of our existence. We cannot hide from this responsibility. The role of automation in critical applications and the threats these applications pose should make us ponder. ACM Software Engineering Notes runs a column Risks to the public in computer systems in which we are told of numerous (near) accidents caused by software failures. The discussion on software reliability provoked by the Strategic Defense Initiative is a case in point (Parnas, 1985; Myers, 1986; Parnas, 1987). Discussions, such as those about the Therac-25 accidents or the maiden flight of the Ariane 5 (see section 1.4), should be compulsory reading for every software engineer.
Software engineering is engineering. Engineers aim for the perfect solution, but know this goal is generally unattainable. During software construction, errors are made. To locate and fix those errors through excessive testing is a laborious affair and mostly not all the errors are found. Good testing is at least as difficult as good design. With the current state of the art we are not able to deliver fault-free software. Different studies indicate that 30--85 errors per 1000 lines of source code are made. These figures seem not to improve over time. During testing, quite a few of those errors are found and subsequently fixed. Yet, some errors do remain undetected. Myers (1986) gives examples of extensively-tested software that still contains 0.5--3 errors per 1000 lines of code. A fault in the seat reservation system of a major airline company incurred a loss of $50M in one quarter. The computerized system reported that cheap seats were sold out while this was in fact not the case. As a consequence, clients were referred to other companies. The problems were not discovered until quarterly results were found to lag considerably behind those of their competitors.
Testing is often taken to mean executing a program to see whether it produces the correct output for a given input. This involves testing the end-product, the software itself. As a consequence, the testing activity often does not get the attention it deserves. By the time the software has been written, we are often pressed for time, which does not encourage thorough testing.
Postponing test activities for too long is one of the most severe mistakes often made in software development projects. This postponement makes testing a rather costly affair. Figure 13.1 shows the results of an early study by Boehm about the cost of error correction relative to the phase in which the error is discovered. This picture shows that errors which are not discovered until after the software has become operational incur costs that are 10 to 90 times higher than those of errors that are discovered during the design phase. This ratio still holds for big and critical systems (Boehm and Basili, 2001). For small, noncritical systems the ratio may be more like 1 to 5.
The development methods and techniques that are applied in the pre-implementation phases are least developed, relatively. It is therefore not surprising that most of the errors are made in those early phases. An early study by Boehm showed that over 60% of the errors were introduced during the design phase, as opposed to 40% during implementation (Boehm, 1975). Worse still, two-thirds of the errors introduced at the design phase were not discovered until after the software had become operational.
It is therefore incumbent on us to plan carefully our testing activities as early as possible. We should also start the actual testing activities at an early stage. An extreme form hereof is test-driven development, one of the practices of XP, in which development starts with writing tests. If we do not start testing until after the implementation stage, we are really far too late. The requirements specification, design, and design specification may also be tested. The rigor hereof depends on the form in which these documents are expressed. This has already been hinted at in previous chapters. In section 13.2, we will again highlight the various verification and validation activities that may be applied at the different phases of the software life cycle. The planning and documentation of these activities is discussed in section 13.3.
Before we decide upon a certain approach to testing, we have to determine our test objectives. If the objective is to find as many errors as possible, we will opt for a strategy which is aimed at revealing errors. If the objective is to increase our confidence in the proper functioning of the software we may well opt for a completely different strategy. So the objective will have its impact on the test approach chosen, since the results have to be interpreted with respect to the objectives set forth. Different test objectives and the degree to which test approaches fit these objectives are the topic of section 13.1.
Testing software shows only the presence of errors, not their absence. As such, it yields a rather negative result: up to now, only ( ) errors have been found. Only when the software is tested exhaustively are we certain about its functioning
 
Figure 13.1 Relative cost of error correction (Source: Barry B. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics, fig. 4.2, page 40, 1981, Reprinted by permission of Prentice Hall, Inc. Englewood Cliffs, NJ)
correctly. In practice this seldom happens. A simple program like
for i from 1 to 100 do
print (if a[i] = true then 1 else 0 endif);
has	different outcomes. Even on a very fast machine -- say a machine which executes 10 million print instructions per second -- exhaustively testing this program would take	years.
An alternative to this brute force approach to testing is to prove the correctness of the software. Proving the correctness of software very soon becomes a tiresome activity, however. It furthermore applies only in circumstances where software requirements are stated formally. Whether these formal requirements are themselves correct has to be decided upon in a different way.
We are thus forced to make a choice. It is of paramount importance to choose a sufficiently small, yet adequate, set of test cases. Test techniques may be classified according to the criterion used to measure the adequacy of a set of test cases:
Coverage-based testing In coverage-based testing, testing requirements are specified in terms of the coverage of the product (program, requirements document, etc.) to be tested. For example, we may specify that all statements of the program should be executed at least once if we run the complete test set, or that all elementary requirements from the requirements specification should be exercised at least once.
Fault-based testing Fault-based techniques focus on detecting faults. The fault detecting ability of the test set then determines its adequacy. For example, we may artificially seed a number of faults in a program, and then require that a test set reveal at least, say, 95% of these artificial faults.
Error-based testing Error-based techniques focus on error-prone points, based on knowledge of the typical errors that people make. For example, off-by-1 errors are often made at boundary values such as 0 or the maximum number of elements in a list, and we may specifically aim our testing effort at these boundary points.
Alternatively, we may classify test techniques based on the source of information used to derive test cases:
Black-box testing, also called functional or specification-based testing. In black-box testing, test cases are derived from the specification of the software, i.e. we do not consider implementation details.
White-box testing, also called structural or program-based testing. This is a complementary approach, in which we do consider the internal logical structure of the software in the derivation of test cases.
We will use the first classification, and discuss different techniques for coverage-based, fault-based and error-based testing in sections 13.5--13.7. These techniques involve the actual execution of a program. Manual techniques which do not involve program execution, such as code reading and inspections, are discussed in section 13.4. In section 13.8 we assess some empirical and theoretical studies that aim to put these different test techniques in perspective.
The above techniques are applied mainly at the component level. This level of testing is often done concurrently with the implementation phase. It is also called unit testing. Besides the component level, we also have to test the integration of a set of components into a system. Possibly also, the final system will be tested once more under direct supervision of the prospective user. In section 13.9 we will sketch these different test phases.
At the system level, the goal pursued often shifts from detecting faults to building trust, by quantitatively assessing reliability. Software reliability is discussed in section 13.10.
 
13.1	Test Objectives
Until now, we have not been very precise in our use of the notion of an error. In order to appreciate the following discussion, it is important to make a careful distinction between the notions error, fault and failure. An error is a human action that produces an incorrect result. The consequence of an error is software containing a fault. A fault thus is the manifestation of an error. If encountered, a fault may result in a failure. 
So, what we observe during testing are failures. These failures are caused by faults, which are in turn the result of human errors. A failure may be caused by more than one fault, and a fault may cause different failures. Similarly, the relation between errors and faults need not be 1--1.
One possible aim of testing is to find faults in the software. Tests are then intended to expose failures. It is not easy to give a precise, unique, definition of the notion of failure. A programmer may take the systems specification as reference point. In this view, a failure occurs if the software does not meet the specifications. The user, however, may consider the software erroneous if it does not match expectations. Failure thus is a relative notion. If software fails, it does so with respect to something else (a specification, user manual, etc). While testing software, we must always be aware of what the software is being tested against.
In this respect a distinction is often made between verification and validation. The IEEE Glossary defines verification as the process of evaluating a system or component to determine whether the products of a given development phase satisfy the conditions imposed at the start of that phase. Verification thus tries to answer the question: Have we built the system right?
The term validation is defined in the IEEE Glossary as the process of evaluating a system or component during or at the end of the development process to determine whether it satisfies specified requirements. Validation then boils down to the question: Have we built the right system?
Even with this subtle distinction in mind, the situation is not all that clear-cut. Generally, a program is considered correct if it consistently produces the right output. We may, though, easily conceive of situations where the programmers intention is not properly reflected in the program but the errors simply do not manifest themselves. An early empirical study showed that many faults are never activated during the lifetime of a system (Adams, 1984). Is it worth fixing those faults? For example, some entry in a case statement may be wrong, but this fault never shows up because it happens to be subsumed by a previous entry. Is this program correct, or should it rather be classified as a program with a latent fault? Even if it is considered correct within the context at hand, chances are that we get into trouble if the program is changed or parts of it are reused in a different environment.
As an example, consider the maiden flight of the Ariane 5. Within 40 seconds after take-off, at an altitude of 3700 meters, the launcher exploded. This was ultimately caused by an overflow in a conversion of a variable from a 64-bit floating point number to a 16-bit signed integer. The piece of software containing this error was reused from the Ariane 4 and had never caused a problem in any of the Ariane 4 flights. This is explained by the fact that the Ariane 5 builds up speed much faster than the Ariane 4, which in turn resulted in excessive values for the parameter in question; see also section 1.4.1.
With the above definitions of error and fault, such programs must be considered faulty, even if we cannot devise test cases that reveal the faults. This still leaves open the question of how to define errors. Since we cannot but guess what the programmers real intentions were, this can only be decided upon by an oracle.
Given the fact that exhaustive testing is not feasible, the test process can be thought of as depicted in figure 13.2. The box labeled P denotes the object (program, design document, etc.) to be tested. The test strategy involves the selection of a subset of the input domain. For each element of this subset, P is used to compute the corresponding output. The expected output is determined by an oracle, something outside the test activity. Finally, the two answers are compared.
 
	Figure 13.2	Global view of the test process
The most crucial step in this process is the selection of the subset of the input domain which will serve as the test set. This test set must be adequate with respect to some chosen test criterion. In section 13.1.1 we elaborate upon the notion of test adequacy.
Test techniques generally use some systematic means to derive test cases. These test cases are meant to provoke failures. Thus, the main objective is fault detection. Alternatively, our test objective could be to increase our confidence in failure-free behavior. These quite different test objectives, and their impact on the test selection problem, are the topic of section 13.1.2.
To test whether the objectives are reached, test cases are tried in order that faults manifest themselves. A quite different approach is to view testing as fault prevention. This leads us to another dimension of test objectives, which to a large extent parallels the evolution of testing strategies over the years. This evolution is discussed in section 13.1.3.
Finally, the picture so far considers each fault equally hazardous. In reality, there are different types of fault, and some faults are more harmful than others. All techniques to be discussed in this chapter can easily be generalized to cover multiple classes of faults, each with its own acceptance criteria.
Some faults are critical and we will have to exert ourselves in order to find those critical faults. Special techniques, such as fault tree analysis, have been developed to this end. Using fault tree analysis, we try to derive a contradiction by reasoning backwards from a given, undesirable, end situation. If such a contradiction can be derived, we have shown that that particular situation can never be reached.
13.1.1	Test Adequacy Criteria
Consider the program text in figure 13.3 and a test set	containing just one test case:
n = 2, A[1] = 10, A[2] = 5
If we execute the program using , then all statements are executed at least once. If our criterion to judge the adequacy of a test set is that 100% of the statements are executed, then is adequate. If our criterion is that 100% of the branches are executed, then is not adequate, since the (empty) else-branch of the if-statement is not executed by .
A test adequacy criterion thus specifies requirements for testing. It can be used in different ways: as stopping rule, as measurement, or as test case generator. If a test adequacy criterion is used as a stopping rule, it tells us when sufficient testing has been done. If statement coverage is the criterion, we may stop testing if all statements have been executed by the tests done so far. In this view, a test set is either good or bad; the criterion is either met, or it isnt. If we relax this requirement a bit and use, say, the percentage of statements executed as a test quality criterion, then the test adequacy criterion is used as a measurement. Formally, it is a mapping from the test set to the interval . Note that the stopping rule view is in fact a special case of the measurement view. Finally, the test adequacy criterion can be used in the test selection process. If a 100% statement coverage has not been achieved yet, an additional test case is selected that covers one or more statements yet untested. This generative view is used in many test tools.
Test adequacy criteria are closely linked to test techniques. For example, coveragebased test techniques keep track of which statements, branches, and so on, are executed, and this gives us an easy handle to determine whether a coverage-based adequacy criterion has been met or not. The same test technique, however, does not help us in assessing whether all error-prone points in a program have been tested.
In a sense, a given test adequacy criterion and the corresponding test technique are opposite sides of the same coin.
	13.1.2	Fault Detection Versus Confidence Building
Failures are needles in the haystack of the input domain
(Hamlet and Taylor, 1990)
Suppose we wish to test some component P which sorts an array A[1..n] of integers, 1 n 1000. Since exhaustive testing is not feasible, we are looking for a strategy in which only a small number of tests are exercised. One possible set of test cases is the following:
Let n assume values 0, 1, 17 and 1000. For each of n = 17 and n = 1000, choose three values for the array A:
	A consists of randomly selected integers;
	A is sorted in ascending order;
	A is sorted in descending order.
In following this type of constructive approach,	the input domain is partitioned into a finite, small number of subdomains. The underlying assumption is that these subdomains are equivalence classes, i.e. from a testing point of view each member from a given subdomain is as good as any other. For example, we have tacitly assumed that one random array of length 17 is as good a test as any other random array of length	with	.
Suppose the actual sorting algorithm used is the one from figure 13.3. If the tests use positive integers only, the output will be correct. The output will not be correct if a test input happens to contain negative integers.
The test set using positive integers only does not reveal the fault because the inputs in the subdomains are not really interchangeable (instead of comparing the values of array entries, the algorithm compares their absolute values). Any form of testing which partitions the input domain works perfectly if the right subdomains are chosen. In practice however, we generally do not know where the needles are hidden, and the partition of the input domain is likely to be imperfect.
Both functional and structural testing schemes use a systematic means to determine subdomains. They often use peculiar inputs to test peculiar cases. Their intention is to provoke failure behavior. Their success hinges on the assumption that we can indeed identify subdomains with a high failure probability. Though this is a good strategy for fault detection, it does not necessarily inspire confidence.
The user of a system is interested in the probability of failure-free behavior. Following this line of thought, we are not so much interested in the faults themselves, but rather in their manifestations. A fault which frequently manifests itself will in procedure selection-sort (A, n); integer i, j, small, temp; begin for i:= 1 to n-1 do small:= i;
for j:= i+1 to n do if abs(A[j])	abs(A[small]) then small:= j endif
enddo;
temp:= A[i]; A[i]:= A[small]; A[small]:= temp enddo
end selection-sort;
	Figure 13.3	Erroneous selection sort procedure
general cause more damage than a fault which seldom shows up. This is precisely what we hinted at above when we discussed fault detection and confidence building as possible test objectives.
If failures are more important than faults, the goal pursued during the test phase may also change. In that case, we will not pursue the discovery of as many faults as possible but will strive for a high reliability. Random testing does not work all that well if we want to find as many faults as possible -- hence the development of different test techniques. When pursuing a high reliability, however, it is possible to use random input.
In order to obtain confidence in the daily operation of a software system, we have to mimic that situation. This requires the execution of a large number of test cases that represent typical usage scenarios. Random testing does at least as good a job in this respect as any form of testing based on partitioning the input domain.
This approach has been applied in the Cleanroom development method. In this method, the development of individual components is done by programmers who are not allowed to actually execute their code. The programmer must then convince himself of the correctness of his components using manual techniques such as stepwise abstraction (see also section 13.4).
In the next step, these components are integrated and tested by someone else. The input for this process is generated according to a distribution which follows the expected operational use of the system. During this integration phase, one tries to reach a certain required reliability level. Experiences with this approach are positive.
The quantitative assessment of failure probability brings us into the area of software reliability. Section 13.10 is devoted to this topic.
	13.1.3	From Fault Detection to Fault Prevention
In the early days of computing, programs were written and then debugged to make sure that they ran properly. Testing and debugging were largely synonymous terms. Both referred to an activity near the end of the development process when the software had been written, but still needed to be checked out.
Todays situation is rather different. Testing activities occur in every phase of the development process. They are carefully planned and documented. The execution of software to compare actual behavior with expected behavior is only one aspect out of many.
Gelperin and Hetzel (1988) identify four major testing models. These roughly parallel the historical development of test practices. The models and their primary goals are given in figure 13.4.
Model	Primary goal
Phase models
Demonstration	Make sure that the software satisfies its specification
Destruction	Detect implementation faults
Life cycle models Evaluation	Detect requirements, design and implementation faults
Prevention	Prevent requirements, design and implementation faults
Figure 13.4 Major testing models (Source: D. Gelperin & B. Hetzel, The growth of software testing, Communications of the ACM 31, 6 (1988) 687-695. Reproduced by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery, Inc.)
The primary goal of the demonstration model is to make sure that the program runs and solves the problem. The strategy is like that of a constructive mathematical proof. If the software passes all tests from the test set, it is claimed to satisfy the requirements. The strategy gives no guidelines as to how to obtain such a test set. A poorly-chosen test set may mask poor software quality.
Most programmers will be familiar with the process of testing their own programs by carefully reading them or executing them with selected input data. If this is done very carefully, it can be beneficial. This method also holds some dangers, however. We may be inclined to consider this form of testing as a method to convince ourselves or someone else that the software does not contain errors. We will then, partly unconsciously, look for test cases which support this hypothesis. This type of demonstration-oriented approach to testing is not to be advocated.
Proper testing is a very destructive process. A program should be tested with the purpose of finding as many faults as possible. A test can only be considered successful if it leads to the discovery of at least one fault. (In a similar way, a visit to your physician is only successful if he finds a fault and we will generally consider such a visit unsatisfactory if we are sent home with the message that nothing wrong could be found.)
In order to improve the chances of producing a high quality system, we should reverse the strategy and start looking for test cases that do reveal faults. This may be termed a proof by contradiction. The test set is then judged by its ability to detect faults.
Since we do not know whether any residual faults are left, it is difficult to decide when to stop testing in either of these models. In the demonstration-oriented model, the criteria most often used to determine this point in time seem to be the following:
	stop if the test budget has run out;
	stop if all test cases have been executed without any failures occurring.
The first criterion is pointless, since it does not tell us anything about the quality of the test effort. If there is no money at all, this criterion is most easily satisfied. The second criterion is pointless as well, since it does not tell us anything about the quality of the test cases.
The destruction-oriented model usually entails some systematic way of deriving test cases. We may then base our stop criterion on the test adequacy criterion that corresponds to the test technique used. An example of this might be: We stop testing if 100% of the branches are covered by the set of test cases, and all test cases yield an unsuccessful result.
Both these models view testing as one phase in the software development process. As noted before, this is not a very good strategy. The life cycle testing models extend testing activities to earlier phases. In the evaluation-oriented model, the emphasis is on analysis and review techniques to detect faults in requirements and design documents. In the prevention model, emphasis is on the careful planning and design of test activities. For example, the early design of test cases may reveal that certain requirements cannot be tested and thus such an activity helps to prevent errors from being made in the first place. Test-driven development falls into this category as well.
We may observe a gradual shift of emphasis in test practice, from a demonstrationlike approach to prevention-oriented methods. Though many organizations still concentrate their test effort late in the development life cycle, various organizations have shown that upstream testing activities can be most effective. Quantitative evidence hereof is provided in section 13.8.3.
Testing need not only result in software with fewer errors. Testing also results in valuable knowledge (error-prone constructs and so on) which can be fed back into the development process. In this view, testing is a learning process, which can be given its proper place in an improvement process.
	13.2	Testing and the Software Life Cycle
In the following subsections we will discuss the various verification and validation activities which can be performed during the requirements engineering, design, implementation and maintenance phases. In doing so, we will also indicate the techniques and tools that may be applied. These techniques and tools will be further discussed in subsequent sections. A summary is given in figure 13.5.
Phase	Activities
Requirements engineering	-- determine test strategy
-- test requirements specification
-- generate functional test data
Design	-- check consistency between design and requirements specification
-- evaluate the software architecture
-- test the design
-- generate structural and functional test data
Implementation	-- check consistency between design and implementation
-- test implementation
-- generate structural and functional test data -- execute tests
Maintenance	-- repeat the above tests in accordance with the degree of redevelopment
Figure 13.5 Activities in the various phases of the software life cycle (Adapted from W.R. Adrion, M.A. Branstad & J.C. Cherniavski, Validation, verification, and testing of computer software, ACM Computing Surveys 14, 2 (1982), Reproduced by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery, Inc.)
Software developers aim for clean code that works. We try to accomplish that by first focusing on the clean code part, and next on the that works part. The clean code part is about proper analysis and design, writing elegant and robust code, and the like. Only after were done with that, do we start testing to make sure the software works properly. Test-driven development (TDD) takes the opposite approach: we
 
13.2. TESTING AND THE SOFTWARE LIFE CYCLE
first make sure the software works, and then tackle the clean code part. We discuss test-driven development in section 13.2.5.
13.2.1	Requirements Engineering
The verification and validation techniques applied during this phase are strongly dependent upon the way in which the requirements specification has been laid down. Something which should be done at the very least is to conduct a careful review or inspection in order to check whether all aspects of the system have been properly described. As we saw earlier, errors made at this stage are very costly to repair if they go unnoticed until late in the development process. Boehm gives four essential criteria for a requirements specification (Boehm, 1984b):
	completeness;
	consistency;
	feasibility;
	testability.
Testing a requirements specification should primarily be aimed at testing these criteria.
The aim of testing the completeness criterion then is to determine whether all components are present and described completely. A requirements specification is incomplete if it contains such phrases as to be determined or if it contains references to undefined elements. We should also watch for the omission of functions or products, such as back-up or restart procedures and test tools to be delivered to the customer.
A requirements specification is consistent if its components do not contradict each other and the specification does not conflict with external specifications. We thus need both internal and external consistency. Moreover, each element in the requirements specification must be traceable. It must, for instance, be possible to decide whether a natural language interface is really needed.
According to Boehm, feasibility has to do with more than functional and performance requirements. The benefits of a computerized system should outweigh the associated costs. This must be established at an early stage and necessitates timely attention to user requirements, maintainability, reliability, and so on. In some cases, the projects success is very sensitive to certain key factors, such as safety, speed, availability of certain types of personnel; these risks must be analyzed at an early stage.
Lastly, a requirements specification must be testable. In the end, we must be able to decide whether or not a system fulfills its requirements. So requirements must be specific, unambiguous, and quantitative. The quality-attribute scenario framework from (Bass et al., 2003) is an example of how to specify such requirements; see also section 6.3.
Many of these points are raised by Poston (1987). According to Poston, the most likely errors in a requirements specification can be grouped into the following categories:
	missing information (functions, interfaces, performance, constraints, reliability, and so on);
	wrong information (not traceable, not testable, ambiguous, and so forth); 	extra information (bells and whistles).
Using a standard format for documenting the requirements specification, such as IEEE Standard 830 discussed in chapter 9, may help enormously in preventing these types of errors to occur in the first place.
Useful techniques for testing the degree to which criteria have been met, are mostly manual (reading documents, inspections, reviews). Scenarios for the expected use of the system can be devised with the prospective users of the system. If requirements are already expressed in use cases, such scenarios are readily available. In this way, a set of functional tests is generated.
At this stage also, a general test strategy for subsequent phases must be formulated. It should encompass the choice of particular test techniques; evaluation criteria; a test plan; a test scheme; and test documentation requirements. A test team may also be formed at this stage. These planning activities are dealt with in section 13.3.
	13.2.2	Design
The criteria mentioned in the previous subsection (completeness, consistency, feasibility and testability) are also essential for the design. The most likely errors in design resemble the kind of errors one is inclined to make in a requirements specification: missing, wrong, and extraneous information. For the design too, a precise documentation standard is of great help in preventing these types of errors. IEEE Standard 1016, discussed in chapter 12, is one such standard.
During the design phase, we decompose the total system into subsystems and components, starting from the requirements specification. We may then develop tests based on this decomposition process. Design is not a one-shot process. During the design process a number of successive refinements will be made, resulting in layers showing increasing detail. Following this design process, more detailed tests can be developed as the lower layers of the design are decided upon.
During the architectural design phase, a high-level conceptual model of the system is developed in terms of components and their interaction. This architecture can be assessed, for example by generating scenarios which express quality concerns such as maintainability and flexibility in very concrete terms, and next evaluating how the architecture handles these scenarios; see also section 11.5.
During the design phase, we may also test the design itself. This includes tracing elements from the requirements specification to the corresponding elements in the
13.2. TESTING AND THE SOFTWARE LIFE CYCLE
design description, and vice versa. Well-known techniques for doing so are, amongst others, simulation, design walkthroughs, and design inspections.
At the requirements engineering phase, the possibilities for formally documenting the resulting specification are limited. Most requirements specifications make excessive use of natural language descriptions. For the design phase, there are ample opportunities to formally document the resulting specification. The more formally the design is specified, the more possibilities we have for applying verification techniques, as well as formal checks for consistency and completeness.
13.2.3	Implementation
During the implementation phase, we do the real testing. One of the most effective techniques to find errors in a program text is to carefully read that text, or have it read. This technique has been successfully applied for a long time. Somewhat formalized variants are known as code-inspection and code-walkthrough. We may also apply the technique of stepwise abstraction. In stepwise abstraction, the function of the code is determined in a number of abstraction steps, starting from the code itself. The various manual test techniques will be discussed in section 13.4.
There are many tools to support the testing of code. We may distinguish between tools for static analysis and tools for dynamic analysis. Static analysis tools inspect the program code without executing it. They include tests like: have all variables been declared and given a value before they are used?
Dynamic analysis tools are used in conjunction with the actual execution of the code, for example tools that keep track of which portions of the code have been covered by the tests so far.
We may try to prove the correctness of the code using formal verification techniques.
All of the above techniques are aimed at evaluating the quality of the source code as well as its compliance with design specifications and code documentation.
It is crucial to control the test information properly while testing the code. Tools may help us in doing so, for example test drivers, test stubs and test data generators. A test driver is a tool that generates the test environment for a component to be tested. A test stub does the opposite: it simulates the function of a component not yet available. In bottom-up testing, we will, in general, make much use of test drivers, while top-down testing implies the use of test stubs. The test strategy (top-down versus bottom-up) may be partly influenced by the design technique used. If the high level, architectural design is implemented as a skeletal system whose holes yet have to be filled in, that skeletal system can be used as a test driver.
Tools may also be profitable while executing the tests (test harnesses and test systems). A simple and yet effective tool is one which compares test results with expected results. The eye is a very unreliable medium. After a short time, all results look OK. An additional advantage of this type of tool support is that it helps to achieve a standard test format. This in turn helps with regression testing.
	13.2.4	Maintenance
On average, more than 50% of total life-cycle costs is spent on maintenance. If we modify the software after a system has become operational (because an error is found late on, or because the system must be adapted to changed requirements), we will have to test the system anew. This is called regression testing. To have this proceed smoothly, the quality of the documentation and the possibilities for tool support, are crucial factors.
In a retest-all approach, all tests are rerun. Since this may consume a lot of time and effort, we may also opt for a selective retest, in which only some of the tests are rerun. A regression test selection technique is then used to decide which subset should be rerun. We would like this technique to include all tests in which the modified and original program produce different results, while omitting tests that produce the same results.
	13.2.5	Test-Driven Development (TDD)
Suppose our library system needs to be able to block borrowing items to members that are on a black list. We could start by redesigning part of the system and implementing the necessary changes: a new table BlackList, and appropriate checks in method Borrow. We also have to decide when members are put on the black list, and how to get them off that list. After having done all the necessary analysis and design, and implemented the changes accordingly, we devise test cases to test for the new functionality.
This order of events is completely reversed in test-driven development (TDD). In test-driven development, we first write a few tests for the new functionality. We may start very simple, and add a test in the start-up method to ensure that the black list is initially empty:
assertEquals(0, BlackList)
Of course, this test will fail. To make it succeed, we have to introduce BlackList, and set it equal to 0. At the same time, we make a list of things still to be done, such as devising a proper type for BlackList, including operations to add and remove members to that list, an update of Borrow to check whether a person borrowing an item is on the black list, and the like. This list of things to be done is similar to the backlog used by architects while architecting a system (see section 11.2).
After we have made the simple test to work, the new version of the system is inspected to see whether it can be improved. And next another small change is contemplated. We may for example decide to make BlackList into a proper list, and write some simple tests to see that after adding some item to the list, that item is indeed in the list. Again, the test will fail, and we update the system accordingly. Possibly, improvements can be made now since the library system probably contains other list-type classes that we can inherit from, and some duplicate code can be removed. And so on.
13.3. VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION PLANNING AND DOCUMENTATION
Test-driven development is one of the practices of eXtreme Programming (see section 3.2.4). As such, it is part of the agile approach to system development which favors small increments and redesign (refactoring) where needed over big design efforts. The practice is usually supported by an automated unit testing framework, such as JUnit for Java, that keeps track of the test set and reports back readable error messages for tests that failed (Hunt and Thomas, 2003). The assertEqual method used above is one of the methods provided by the JUnit framework. The framework allows for a smooth integration of coding and unit testing. On the fly, a test set is built that forms a reusable asset during the further evolution of the system. JUnit and similar frameworks have greatly contributed to the success of test-driven development.
The way of working in each iteration of test-driven development consists of the following steps:
1.	Add a test
2.	Run all tests, and observe that the one added will fail
3.	Make a small change to the system to make the test work
4.	Run al tests again, and observe that they run properly
5.	Refactor the system to remove duplicate code and improve its design.
In pure eXtreme Programming, iterations are very small, and may take a few minutes up to, say, an hour. But test-driven development can also be done in bigger leaps, and be combined with more traditional approaches.
Test-driven development is much more than a test method. It is a different way of developing software. The effort put into the upfront development of test cases forces one to think more carefully of what it means for the current iteration to succeed or fail. Writing down explicit test cases subsumes part of the analysis and design work. Rather than producing UML diagrams during requirements analysis, we produce tests. And these tests are used immediately, by the same person that implemented the functionality that the test exercises. Testing then is not an afterthought, but becomes an integral part of the development process. Another benefit is that we have a test set and a test criterion to decide on the success of the iteration. Experiments with test-driven development indicate that it increases productivity and reduces defect rates.
13.3	Verification and Validation Planning and Documentation
Like the other phases and activities of the software development process, the testing activities need to be carefully planned and documented. Since test activities start early in the development life cycle and span all subsequent phases, timely attention to the planning of these activities is of paramount importance. A precise description of the various activities, responsibilities and procedures must be drawn up at an early stage.
The planning of test activities is described in a document called the Software Verification and Validation Plan. We will base our discussion of its contents on the corresponding IEEE Standard 1012. Standard 1012 describes verification and validation activities for a waterfall-like life cycle in which the following phases are identified:
Concept phase
Requirements phase
Design phase
Implementation phase
Test phase
Installation and checkout phase
Operation and maintenance phase
The first of these, the concept phase, is not discussed in the present text. Its aim is to describe and evaluate user needs. It produces documentation which contains, for example, a statement of user needs, results of feasibility studies, and policies relevant to the project. The verification and validation plan is also prepared during this phase. In our approach, these activities are included in the requirements engineering phase.
The sections to be included in the Verification and Validation (V&V) Plan are listed in figure 13.6. The structure of this plan resembles that of other standards discussed earlier. The plan starts with an overview and gives detailed information on every aspect of the topic being covered. The various constituents of the Verification and Validation Plan are discussed in appendix ??.
More detailed information on the many V&V tasks covered by this plan can be found in (IEEE1012, 1986). Following the organization proposed in this standard, the bulk of the test documentation can be structured along the lines identified in figure 13.7. The Test Plan is a document describing the scope, approach, resources, and schedule of intended test activities. It can be viewed as a further refinement of the Verification and Validation Plan and describes in detail the test items, features to be tested, testing tasks, who will do each task, and any risks that require contingency planning.
The Test Design documentation specifies, for each software feature or combination of such features, the details of the test approach and identifies the associated tests. The Test Case documentation specifies inputs, predicted outputs and execution conditions for each test item. The Test Procedure documentation specifies the
13.3. VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION PLANNING AND DOCUMENTATION
 
1.	Purpose
2.	Referenced documents
3.	Definitions
4.	Verification and validation overview
4.1.	Organization
4.2.	Master schedule
4.3.	Resources summary
4.4.	Responsibilities
4.5.	Tools, techniques and methodologies
5.	Life-cycle verification and validation (V&V)
5.1.	Management of V&V
5.2.	Requirements phase V&V
5.3.	Design phase V&V
5.4.	Implementation phase V&V
5.5.	Test phase V&V
5.6.	Installation and checkout phase V&V
5.7.	Operation and maintenance phase V&V
6.	Software verification and validation reporting
7.	Verification and validation administrative procedures
7.1.	Anomaly reporting and resolution
7.2.	Task iteration policy
7.3.	Deviation policy
7.4.	Control procedures
7.5.	Standards, practices and conventions
 
Figure 13.6 p of the Verification and Validation Plan (Source: IEEE Standard for Software Verification and Validation Plans, IEEE Std. 1012, 1986. Reproduced by permission of IEEE.)
sequence of actions for the execution of each test. Together, the first four documents describe the input to the test execution.
The Test Item Transmittal Report specifies which items are going to be tested. It lists the items, specifies where to find them, and the status of each item. It constitutes the release information for a given test execution.
The final three items are the output of the test execution. The Test Log gives a chronological record of events. The Test Incident Report documents all events observed that require further investigation. In particular, this includes the tests whose outputs were not as expected. Finally, the Test Summary Report gives an overview and evaluation of the findings. A detailed description of the contents of these various documents is given in the IEEE Standard for Software Documentation (IEEE829, 1998).
 
Test Plan
Test Design Specification
Test Case Specification
Test Procedure Specification
Test Item Transmittal Report
Test Log
Test Incident Report
Test Summary Report
 
	Figure 13.7	Main constituents of test documentation, after	(IEEE829, 1998)
	13.4	Manual Test Techniques
A lot of research effort is spent on finding techniques and tools to support testing. Yet, a plethora of heuristic test techniques have been applied since the beginning of the programming era. These heuristic techniques, such as walkthroughs and inspections, often work quite well, although it is not always clear why.
Test techniques can be separated into static and dynamic analysis techniques. During dynamic analysis, the program is executed. With this form of testing, the program is given some input and the results of the execution are compared with the expected results. During static analysis, the software is generally not executed. Many static test techniques can also be applied to non-executable artifacts such as a design document or user manual. It should be noted, though, that the borderline between static and dynamic analysis is not very sharp.
A large part of the static analysis is nowadays done by the language compiler. The compiler then checks whether all variables have been declared, whether each method call has the proper number of actual parameters, and so on. These constraints are part of the language definition. We may also apply a more strict analysis of the program text, such as a check for initialization of variables, or a check on the use of non-standard, or error-prone, language constructs. In a number of cases, the call to a compiler is parameterized to indicate the checks one wants to be performed. Sometimes, separate tools are provided for these checks.
The techniques to be discussed in the following subsections are best classified as static techniques. The techniques for coverage-based, fault-based and error-based testing, to be discussed in sections 13.5--13.7, are mostly dynamic in nature.
 
13.4.1	Reading
We all read, and reread, and reread, our program texts. It is the most traditional test technique we know of. It is also a very successful technique to find faults in a program text (or a specification, or a design).
In general, it is better to have someone else read your texts. The author of a text knows all too well what the program (or any other type of document) ought to convey. For this reason, the author may be inclined to overlook things, suffering from some sort of trade blindness.
A second reason why reading by the author himself might be less fruitful, is that it is difficult to adopt a destructive attitude towards ones own work. Yet such an attitude is needed for successful testing.
A somewhat institutionalized form of reading each others programs is known as peer review. This is a technique for anonymously assessing programs as regards quality, readability, usability, and so on.
Each person partaking in a peer review is asked to hand in two programs: a best program and one of lesser quality. These programs are then randomly distributed amongst the participants. Each participant assesses four programs: two best programs and two programs of lesser quality. After all results have been collected, each participant gets the (anonymous) evaluations of their programs, as well as the statistics of the whole test.
The primary goal of this test is to give the programmer insight into his own capabilities. The practice of peer reviews shows that programmers are quite capable of assessing the quality of their peers software.
A necessary precondition for successfully reading someone elses code is a businesslike attitude. Weinberg (1971) coined the term egoless programming for this. Many programmers view their code as something personal, like a diary. Derogatory remarks (how could you be so stupid as to forget that initialization) can disastrously impair the effectiveness of such assessments. The opportunity for such an antisocial attitude to occur seems to be somewhat smaller with the more formalized manual techniques.
13.4.2	Walkthroughs and Inspections
Walkthroughs and inspections are both manual techniques that spring from the traditional desk-checking of program code. In both cases it concerns teamwork, whereby the product to be inspected is evaluated in a formal session, following precise procedures.
Inspections are sometimes called Fagan inspections, after their originator (Fagan, 1976, 1986). In an inspection, the code to be assessed is gone through statement by statement. The members of the inspection team (usually four) get the code, its specification, and the associated documents a few days before the session takes place.
Each member of the inspection team has a well-defined role. The moderator is responsible for the organization of inspection meetings. He chairs the meeting and ascertains that follow-up actions agreed upon during the meeting are indeed performed. The moderator must ensure that the meeting is conducted in a businesslike, constructive way and that the participants follow the correct procedures and act as a team. The team usually has two inspectors or readers, knowledgeable peers that paraphrase the code. Finally, the code author is a largely silent observer. He knows the code to be inspected all too well and is easily inclined to express what he intended rather than what is actually written down. He may, though, be consulted by the inspectors.
During the formal session, the inspectors paraphrase the code, usually a few lines at a time. They express the meaning of the text at a higher level of abstraction than what is actually written down. This gives rise to questions and discussions which may lead to the discovery of faults. At the same time, the code is analyzed using a checklist of faults that often occur. Examples of possible entries in this checklist are:
	wrongful use of data: variables not initialized, array index out of bounds, dangling pointers, etc.;
	faults in declarations: the use of undeclared variables or the declaration of the same name in nested blocks, etc.;
	faults in computations: division by zero, overflow (possible in intermediate results too), wrong use of variables of different types in the same expression, faults caused by an erroneous understanding of operator priorities, etc.;
	faults in relational expressions: using an incorrect operator ( instead of , instead of ) or an erroneous understanding of priorities of Boolean operators, etc.;
	faults in control flow: infinite loops or a loop that gets executed or times rather than times, etc.;
	faults in interfaces: an incorrect number of parameters, parameters of the wrong type, or an inconsistent use of global variables, etc.
The result of the session is a list of problems identified.
These problems are not resolved during the formal session itself. This might easily lead to quick fixes and distract the team from its primary goal. After the meeting, the code author resolves all issues raised and the revised code is verified once again. Depending on the number of problems identified and their severity, this second inspection may be done by the moderator only or by the complete inspection team.
Since the goal of an inspection is to identify as many problems as possible in order to improve the quality of the software to be developed, it is important to maintain a constructive attitude towards the programmer whose code is being assessed.  The results of an inspection therefore are often marked confidential. These results should certainly not play a role in the formal assessment of the programmer in question.
In a walkthrough, the team is guided through the code using test data. These test data are mostly of a fairly simple kind. Otherwise, tracing the program logic soon becomes too complicated. The test data serves as a means to start a discussion, rather than as a serious test of the program. In each step of this process, the designer may be questioned regarding the rationale of the decisions. In many cases, a walkthrough boils down to some sort of manual simulation.
Both walkthroughs and inspections may profitably be applied at all stages of the software life cycle. The only precondition is that there is a clear, testable document. It is estimated that these review methods detect 50 to 90% of defects (Boehm and Basili, 2001). Both techniques not only serve to find faults. If properly applied, these techniques may help to promote team spirit and morale. At the technical level, the people involved may learn from each other and enrich their knowledge of algorithms, programming style, programming techniques, error-prone constructions, and so on. Thus, these techniques also serve as a vehicle for process improvement. Under the general umbrella of peer reviews, they are part of the CMM level 3 key process area
Verification (see section 6.6).
A potential danger of this type of review is that it remains too shallow. The people involved become overwhelmed with information, they may have insufficient knowledge of the problem domain, their responsibilities may not have been clearly delineated. As a result, the review process does not pay off sufficiently.
Parnas and Weiss (1987) describe a type of review process in which the people involved have to play a more active role. Parnas distinguishes between different types of specialized design review. Each of these reviews concentrates on certain desirable properties of the design. As a consequence, the responsibilities of the people involved are clear. The reviewers have to answer a list of questions (under which conditions may this function be called, what is the effect of this function on the behavior of other functions, and the like). In this way, the reviewers are forced to study carefully the design information received. Problems with the questionnaire and documentation can be posed to the designers, and the completed questionnaires are discussed by the designers and reviewers. Experiments suggest that inspections with specialized review roles are more effective than inspections in which review roles are not specialized.
A very important component of Fagan inspections is the meeting in which the document is discussed. Since meetings may incur considerable costs or time-lags, one may try to do without them. Experiments suggest that the added value of group meetings, as far as the number of problems identified is concerned, is quite small.
13.4.3	Correctness Proofs
The most complete static analysis technique is the proof of correctness. In a proof of correctness we try to prove that a program meets its specification. In order to be able to do so, the specification must be expressed formally. We mostly do this by expressing the specification in terms of two assertions which hold before and after the programs execution, respectively. Next, we prove that the program transforms one assertion (the precondition) into the other (the postcondition). This is generally denoted as
	P	S	Q
Here, S is the program, P is the precondition, and Q is the postcondition. Termination of the program is usually proved separately. The above notation should thus be read as: if P holds before the execution of S, and S terminates, then Q holds after the execution of S.
Formally verifying the correctness of a not-too-trivial program is a very complex affair. Some sort of tool support is helpful, therefore. Tools in this area are often based on heuristics and proceed interactively.
Correctness proofs are very formal and, for that reason, they are often difficult for the average programmer to construct. The value of formal correctness proofs is sometimes disputed. We may state that the thrust in software is more important than some formal correctness criterion. Also, we cannot formally prove every desirable property of software. Whether we built the right system can only be decided upon through testing (validation).
On the other hand, it seems justified to state that a thorough knowledge of this type of formal technique will result in better software.
	13.4.4	Stepwise Abstraction
In the top-down development of software components we often employ stepwise refinement. At a certain level of abstraction the function to be executed will then be denoted by a description of that function. At the next level, this description is decomposed into more basic units.
Stepwise abstraction is just the opposite. Starting from the instructions of the source code, the function of the component is built up in a number of steps. The function thus derived should comply with the function as described in the design or requirements specification.
Below, we will illustrate this technique with a small example. Consider the search routine of figure 13.8. We know, from the accompanying documentation, for instance, that the elements in array A are sorted when this routine is called.
We start the stepwise abstraction with the instructions at the innermost nesting level, the if-statement on lines 7--10. In these lines, x is being compared with A[mid]. Depending on the result of this comparison, one of high, low and found is given a new value. If we take into account the initializations on lines 4 and 6, the function of this if-statement can be summarized as
stop searching (found:= true) if x = A[mid], or shorten the interval [low .. high] that might contain x, to an interval
	[low .. high], where high - low	high - low
Alternatively, this may be described as a postcondition to the if-statement:
1	procedure binsearch
2	(A: array [1..n] of integer; x: integer): integer;
3	var low, high, mid: integer; found: boolean;
4	begin low:= 1; high:= n; found:= false;
5	while (low	high) and not found do
6	mid:= (low + high) div 2;
7	if x	A[mid] then high:= mid - 1 else
8	if x	A[mid] then low:= mid + 1 else
9	found:= true
10	endif
11	enddo;
12	if found then return mid else return 0 endif
13	end binsearch;
	Figure 13.8	A search routine
(found = true and x = A[mid]) or
(found = false and x	A[1 .. low - 1] and x	A[high + 1 .. n] and high - low	high - low)
Next, we consider the loop in lines 5--11, together with the initialization on line 4. As regards termination of the loop, we may observe the following. If 1 n upon calling the routine, then low high at the first execution of lines 5--11. From this, it follows that low mid high. If the element searched for is found, the loop stops and the position of that element is returned. Otherwise, either high gets assigned a smaller value, or low gets assigned a higher value. Thus, the interval [low .. high] gets smaller. At some point in time, the interval will have length of 1, i.e. low = high (assuming the element still is not found). Then, mid will be assigned that same value. If x still does not occur at position mid, either high will get the value low - 1, or low will get the value high + 1. In both cases, low high, and the loop terminates. Together with the postcondition given earlier, it then follows that x does not occur in the array A. The function of the complete routine can then be described as:
result = 0	x	A[1 .. n] 1	result	n	x = A[result]
So, stepwise abstraction is a bottom-up process to deduce the function of a piece of program text from that text.
	13.5	Coverage-Based Test Techniques
Question: What do you do when you see a graph? Answer: Cover it!
(Beizer, 1995)
In coverage-based test techniques, the adequacy of testing is expressed in terms of the coverage of the product to be tested, for example, the percentage of statements executed or the percentage of functional requirements tested.
Coverage-based testing is often based on the number of instructions, branches or paths visited during the execution of a program. It is helpful to base the discussion of this type of coverage-based testing on the notion of a control graph. In this control graph, nodes denote actions, while the (directed) edges connect actions with subsequent actions (in time). A path is a sequence of nodes connected by edges. The graph may contain cycles, i.e. paths such that . These cycles correspond to loops in the program (or gotos). A cycle is called simple if its inner nodes are distinct and do not include (or for that matter). Note that a sequence of actions (statements) that has the property that whenever the first action is executed, the other actions are executed in the given order may be collapsed into a single, compound, action. So when we draw the control graph for the program in figure 13.9, we may put the statements on lines 10--14 in different nodes, but we may also put them all in a single node.
In sections 13.5.1 and 13.5.2 we discuss a number of test techniques which are based on coverage of the control graph of the program. Section 13.5.3 illustrates how these coverage-based techniques can be applied at the requirements specification level.
	13.5.1	Control-Flow Coverage
During the execution of a program, we will follow a certain path through its control graph. If some node has multiple outgoing edges, we choose one of those (which is also called a branch). In the ideal case, the tests collectively traverse all possible paths. This so-called All-Paths coverage is equivalent to exhaustively testing the program.
In general, this is not possible. A loop often results in an infinite number of possible paths. If we do not have loops, but only branch-instructions, the number of possible paths increases exponentially with the number of branching points. There may also be paths that are never executed (quite likely, the program contains a fault in that case). We therefore search for a criterion which expresses the degree to which the test data approximates the ideal covering.
Many such criteria can be devised. The most obvious is the criterion which counts the number of statements (nodes in the graph) executed. It is called the All-Nodes coverage, or statement coverage. This criterion is rather weak because it is relatively simple to construct examples in which 100% statement coverage is achieved, while the program is nevertheless incorrect.
 
13.5. COVERAGE-BASED TEST TECHNIQUES
1	procedure bubble
2	(var a: array [1..n] of integer; n: integer);
3	var i, j, temp: integer;
4	begin
5	for i:= 2 to n do
6	if a[i]	a[i-1] then goto next endif;
7	j:= i;
8	loop: if j	1 then goto next endif;
9	if a[j]	a[j-1] then goto next endif;
10	temp:= a[j];
11	a[j]:= a[j-1];
12	a[j-1]:= temp;
13	j:= j-1;
14	goto loop;
15	next: skip;
16	enddo
17	end;
	Figure 13.9	A sort routine
Consider as an example the program given in figure 13.9. It is easy to see that one single test, with n = 2, a[1] = 5, a[2] = 3, will result in each statement being executed at least once. So, this one test achieves a 100% statement coverage. However, if we change, for example, the test a[i] a[i - 1] in line 6 to a[i] = a[i - 1], we still obtain a 100% statement coverage with this test. Although this test also yields the correct answer, the changed program is incorrect.
We get a stronger criterion if we require that at each branching node in the control graph, all possible branches are chosen at least once. This is known as All-Edges coverage or branch coverage. Here too, a 100% coverage is no guarantee of program correctness.
Nodes that contain a condition, such as the boolean expression in an if-statement, can be a combination of elementary predicates connected by logical operators. A condition of the form
	i	0	j	0
requires at least two tests to guarantee that both branches are taken. For example,
i = 1, j = 1
and
i = 0, j = 1
will do. Other possible combinations of truth values of the atomic predicates (i = 1, j = 0 and i = 0, j = 0) need not be considered to achieve branch coverage. Multiple condition coverage requires that all possible combinations of elementary predicates in conditions be covered by the test set. This criterion is also known as extended branch coverage.
Finally, McCabes cyclomatic complexity metric (McCabe, 1976) has also been applied to testing. This criterion is also based on the control graph representation of a program.
A basis set is a maximal linearly-independent set of paths through a graph. The cyclomatic complexity ( ) equals this number of linearly-independent paths (see also section 12.1.4). Its formula is
	Here,	is the graphs cyclomatic number:
where
= the number of edges in the graph
= the number of nodes
= the number of components (a component is a maximal subgraph that is connected, i.e. a maximal subgraph for which each pair of nodes is connected by some path)
1	procedure insert(a, b, n, x);
2	begin bool found:= false;
3	for i:= 1 to n do
4	if a[i] = x
5	then found:= true; goto leave endif
6	enddo;
7	leave:
8	if found
9	then b[i]:= b[i] + 1
10	else n:= n + 1; a[n]:= x; b[n]:= 1 endif
11	end insert;
	Figure 13.10	An insertion routine
13.5. COVERAGE-BASED TEST TECHNIQUES
As an example, consider the program text of figure 13.10. The corresponding control graph is given in figure 13.11. For this graph, , , and . So and . A possible
set of linearly-independent paths for this graph is:	1--2--3--4--5--6--7--8--9--11, 3--7, 4--6--3, 8--10--11	.
 
	Figure 13.11	Control-flow graph of the insert routine from figure 13.10
A possible test strategy is to construct a test set such that all linearly-independent paths are covered. This adequacy criterion is known as the cyclomatic-number criterion.
13.5.2	Dataflow Coverage
Starting from the control graph of a program, we may also consider how variables are treated along the various paths. This is termed dataflow analysis. With dataflow analysis too, we may define test adequacy criteria and use these criteria to guide testing.
In dataflow analysis, we consider the definitions and uses of variables along execution paths. A variable is defined in a certain statement if it is assigned a (new) value because of the execution of that statement. After that, the new value will be used in subsequent statements. A definition in statement X is alive in statement Y if there exists a path from X to Y in which that variable does not get assigned a new value at some intermediate node. In the example in figure 13.9, for instance, the definition of j at line 7 is still alive at line 13 but not at line 14. A path such as the one from line 7 to 13 is called definition-clear (with respect to j). Algorithms to determine such facts are commonly used in compilers in order to allocate variables optimally to machine registers.
We distinguish between two types of variable use: P-uses and C-uses. P-uses are predicate uses, like those in the conditional part of an if-statement. All other uses are C-uses. Examples of the latter are uses in computations or I/O statements.
A possible test strategy is to construct tests which traverse a definition-clear path between each definition of a variable to each (P- or C-) use of that definition and each successor of that use. (We have to include each successor of a use to force all branches following a P-use to be taken.) We are then sure that each possible use of a definition is being tested. This strategy is known as All-Uses coverage. A slightly stronger criterion requires that each definition-clear path is either cycle-free or a simple cycle. This is known as All-DU-Paths coverage. Several weaker dataflow criteria can be defined as well:
	All-defs coverage simply requires the test set to be such that each definition is used at least once.
	All-C-uses/Some-P-uses coverage requires definition-clear paths from each definition to each computational use. If a definition is used only in predicates, at least one definition-clear path to a predicate use must be exercised.
	All-P-Uses/Some-C-uses coverage requires definition-clear paths from each definition to each predicate use. If a definition is used only in computations, at least one definition-clear path to a computational use must be exercised.
	All-P-Uses coverage requires definition-clear paths from each definition to each predicate use.
	13.5.3	Coverage-Based Testing of Requirements Specifications
Program code can be easily transformed into a graph model, thus allowing for all kinds of test adequacy criteria based on graphs. Requirements specifications, however, may also be transformed into a graph model. As a consequence, the various coverage-based adequacy criteria can be used in both black-box and white-box testing techniques.
Consider the example fragment of a requirements specification document for our library system in figure 13.12. We may rephrase these requirements a bit and present them in the form of elementary requirements and relations between them. The result can be depicted as a graph, where the nodes denote elementary requirements and the edges denote relations between elementary requirements; see figure 13.13. We may
 
use this graph model to derive test cases and apply any of the control-flow coverage criteria to assess their adequacy.
 
Function Order allows the user to order new books. The user is shown a fill-in-theblanks screen with fields like Author, Title, Publisher, Price and Department. The Title, Price and Department fields are mandatory. The Department field is used to check whether the departments budget is large enough to purchase this book. If so, the book is ordered and the departments budget is reduced accordingly.
 
	Figure 13.12	A requirements specification fragment
A very similar route can be followed if the requirement is expressed in the form of a use case. Figure 13.14 gives a possible rewording of the fragment from figure 13.12. It uses the format from (Cockburn, 2001). The use case describes both the normal case, called the Main Success Scenario, as well as extensions that cover situations that branch off the normal path because of some condition. For each extension, both the condition and the steps taken are listed. Note that figure 13.13 directly mimics the use case description from 13.14. The use case description also allows us to straightforwardly derive test cases and apply control-flow coverage criteria.
Generally speaking, a major problem in determining a set of test cases is to partition the program domain into a (small) number of equivalence classes. We try to do so in such a way that testing a representative element from a class suffices for the whole class. Using control-flow coverage criteria, for example, we assume that any test of some node or branch is as good as any other such test. In the above example, for instance, we assume that any execution of the node labeled check dept. budget will do.
The weak point in this procedure is the underlying assumption that the program behaves equivalently on all data from a given class. If such assumption is true, the partition is perfect and so is the test set.
Such assumption will in general not hold however (see also section 13.1.2).
13.6	Fault-Based Test Techniques
In coverage-based testing techniques, we consider the structure of the problem or its solution, and the assumption is that a more comprehensive covering is better. In fault-based testing strategies, we do not directly consider the artifact being tested when assessing the test adequacy. We only take into account the test set. Fault-based techniques are aimed at finding a test set with a high ability to detect faults.
We will discuss two fault-based testing techniques: error seeding and mutation testing.
 
	Figure 13.13	Graph model of requirements specification fragment
	13.6.1	Error Seeding
Text books on statistics often contain examples along the following lines: if we want to estimate the number of pikes in Lake Soft, we proceed as follows:
1.	Catch a number of pikes,	, in Lake Seed;
2.	Mark them and throw them into Lake Soft;
3.	Catch a number of pikes,	, in Lake Soft.
Use Case: Order new Book
 
Primary Actor: Library user
Scope: Library
Level: User goal
Stakeholders and Interests: User---wants to acquire new books
Department---wants to guard its budget Precondition: User is logged on
Minimum Guarantee: User id has been validated Success Guarantee: Order is accepted
Main Success Scenario:
1.	User fills in form
2.	Book information is checked
3.	Department budget is checked
4.	Order is placed
5.	User is informed about placed orderExtensions:
2a. Book information is not valid
2a1. User is asked to correct information
3a. Department budget is inadequate
3a1. Order is rejected, user is notified
 
	Figure 13.14	Requirement in the form of a use case
Supposing that out of the pikes are found to be marked, the total number of pikes originally present in Lake Soft is then estimated as .
A somewhat unsophisticated technique is to try to estimate the number of faults in a program in a similar way. The easiest way to do this is to artificially seed a number of faults in the program. When the program is tested, we will discover both seeded faults and new ones. The total number of faults is then estimated from the ratio of those two numbers.
We must be aware of the fact that a number of assumptions underlie this method -- amongst others, the assumption that both real and seeded faults have the same distribution.
There are various ways of determining which faults to seed in the program. A not very satisfactory technique is to construct them by hand. It is unlikely that we will be able to construct very realistic faults in this way. Faults thought up by one person have a fair chance of having been thought up already by the person that wrote the software.
Another technique is to have the program independently tested by two groups. The faults found by the first group can then be considered seeded faults for the second group. In using this technique, though, we must realize that there is a chance that both groups will detect (the same type of) simple faults. As a result, the picture might well get distorted.
A useful rule of thumb for this technique is the following: if we find many seeded faults and relatively few others, the result can be trusted. The opposite is not true. This phenomenon is more generally applicable: if, during testing of a certain component, many faults are found, it should not be taken as a positive sign. Quite the contrary, it is an indication that the component is probably of low quality. As Myers observed: The probability of the existence of more errors in a section of a program is proportional to the number of errors already found in that section. (Myers, 1979). The same phenomenon has been observed in some experiments, where a strong linear relationship was found between the number of defects discovered during early phases of development and the number of defects discovered later.
	13.6.2	Mutation Testing
Suppose we have some program which produces the correct results for some tests and . We next generate some variant of . differs from in just one
place. For instance, a	is replaced by a	, or the value v in a loop of the form
for var:= v to v	do	
is changed into v	or v	. Next,		is tested using tests	and	. Let us
assume that produces the same result in both cases, whereas produces different results. Then is the more interesting test case, since it does not discriminate between two variants of a program, one of which is certainly wrong.
In mutation testing, a (large) number of variants of a program is generated. Each of those variants, or mutants, slightly differs from the original version. Usually, mutants are obtained by mechanically applying a set of simple transformations called mutation operators. Figure 13.15 lists a number of such mutation operators.
Next, all these mutants are executed using a given test set. As soon as a test produces a different result for one of the mutants, that mutant is said to be dead. Mutants that produce the same results for all of the tests are said to be alive. As an example, consider the erroneous sort procedure in figure 13.3 and the correct variant thereof which compares array elements rather than their absolute values. Tests with an array which happens to contain positive numbers only will leave both variants alive. If a test set leaves us with many live mutants, then that test set is of low quality, since it is not able to discriminate between all kinds of variants of a given program.
If we assume that the number of mutants that is equivalent to the original program is 0 (normally, this number will certainly be very small), then the mutation adequacy score of a test set equals , where is the number of dead mutants and is the total number of mutants.
 
Replace a constant by another constant
Replace a variable by another variable
Replace a constant by a variable
Replace an arithmetic operator by another arithmetic operator
Replace a logical operator by another logical operator
Insert a unary operator
Delete a statement
 
	Figure 13.15	A sample of mutation operators
There are two major variants of mutation testing: strong mutation testing and weak mutation testing. Suppose we have a program with a component . In strong mutation testing, we require that tests produce different results for program and a mutant . In weak mutation testing, we only require that component and its mutant produce different results. At the level of , this difference need not crop up. Weak mutation adequacy is often easier to establish. Consider a component of the form
	if x	4.5 then . . .
We may then compute a series of mutants of	, such as
if x	4.5 then . . .
if x	4.5 then . . .
if x	4.6 then . . .
if x	4.4 then . . .
. . .
Next, we have to devise a test set that produces different results for the original component and at least one of its variants. This test set is then adequate for .
Mutation testing is based on two assumptions: the Competent Programmer Hypothesis and the Coupling Effect Hypothesis. The Competent Programmer Hypothesis states that competent programmers write programs that are close to being correct. So the program actually written may be incorrect, but it will differ from a correct version by relatively minor faults. If this hypothesis is true, we should be able to detect these faults by testing variants that differ slightly from the correct program, i.e. mutants. The second hypothesis states that tests that can reveal simple faults can also reveal complex faults. Experiments give some empirical evidence for these hypotheses.
	13.7	Error-Based Test Techniques
Suppose our library system maintains a list of hot books. Each newly-acquired book is automatically added to the list. After six months, it is removed again. Also, if a book is more than four months old and is being borrowed less than five times a month or is more than two months old and is being borrowed at most twice a month, it is removed from the list.
This rather complex requirement can be graphically depicted as in figure 13.16. It shows that the two-dimensional (age, average number of loans) domain can be partitioned into four subdomains. These subdomains directly relate to the requirements as stated above. The subdomains are separated by borders such as the line . For each border, it is indicated which of the adjacent subdomains is closed at that border by placing a hachure at that side of the border. A subdomain is closed at a border if that border belongs to ; otherwise, it is open at that border.
 
	Figure 13.16	Partitioning of the input space
An obvious test technique for this requirement is to use an input from each of these subdomains. If the program follows the logic of the requirement, then test adequacy for that requirement equals path coverage for the corresponding program. However, in error-based testing, we focus on error prone points, and these are often found near the borders of subdomains.
 
One such test strategy concentrates on ON and OFF points. An ON point is a point on the border of a subdomain. If a subdomain is open with respect to some border, then an OFF point of a border is a point just inside that border. If a subdomain is closed with respect to some border, then an OFF point lies just outside that border. Two adjacent subdomains share the same ON point; they may share the same OFF point. In figure 13.16, the solid circle on the line is an ON point of both and , while the circle just off this line is an OFF point of both these subdomains.
Suppose we have subdomains . We may then construct a test set which contains test cases for ON points of each border of each subdomain , and at least one test case for an OFF point of each border. The resulting test set is called domain adequate.
Above, we have illustrated this error-based technique in its black-box, specificationbased form. The same technique can be applied to program text, though. If a program contains code of the form
if x	6 then . . .	
elsif x	4 and y	5 then . . .
elsif x	2 and y else . . .	2 then . . .
then we may identify the same four subdomains and use the same technique to test for boundary cases. In fact, this technique is just a systematic way to do what experienced programmers have done for a long time past: test for boundary values, such as 0, nil, lists with 0 or 1 element, and so on.
13.8	Comparison of Test Techniques
Most test techniques are heuristic in nature and lack a sound theoretical basis. Manual test techniques rely heavily on the qualities of the participants in the test process. But even the systematic approaches taken in functional and structural test techniques have a rather weak underpinning and are based on assumptions that are generally not true.
Experiments show that it is sometimes deceptively simple to make a system produce faults or even let it crash. Miller et al. (1990) describe one such experiment, in which they were able to crash or hang approximately 30% of the UNIX utilities on seven versions of the UNIX operating system. The utilities tested included commonly-used text editors and text formatters.
Similar results have been obtained in mutation analysis experiments. In one such experiment (Knight and Ammann, 1985), 17 programs developed by different programmers from one and the same specification were used. These programs had all been thoroughly tested. Some of them had successfully withstood one million tests. For each of those programs, 24 mutants were created, each mutant containing one seeded fault. The programs thus obtained were each tested 25 000 times. The results can be summarized as follows:
	Some seeded faults were found quickly, some needed quite a few tests, and some remained undetected even after 25 000 tests. This pattern was found for each of the 17 programs;
	In some cases, the original program failed, while the modified program yielded the right result.
In the past, several attempts have been made to obtain more insights into the theoretical aspects of test techniques. An example is the research that is aimed at relating different test adequacy criteria. Test adequacy criteria serve as rules used to determine whether or not testing can be terminated. An important issue then is to decide whether one such criterion is better than another. In section 13.8.1, we compare the strength of a number of test adequacy criteria discussed in previous sections. In section 13.8.2 we investigate a number of fundamental properties of test adequacy criteria. This type of research is aimed at gaining a deeper insight into properties of different test techniques.
Several experiments have been done to compare different test techniques. Real data from a number of projects are also available on the fault-detection capabilities of test techniques used in those projects. In section 13.8.3 we discuss several of these findings which may provide some practical insight into the virtues of a number of test techniques.
	13.8.1	Comparison of Test Adequacy Criteria
A question that may be raised is whether, say, the All-Uses adequacy criterion is stronger or weaker than the All-Nodes or All-Edges adequacy criteria. We may define the notion stronger as follows: criterion X is stronger than criterion Y if, for all programs P and all test sets T, X-adequacy implies Y-adequacy. In the testing literature this relation is known as subsume. In this sense, the All-Edges criterion is stronger than (subsumes) the All-Nodes criterion. The All-Uses criterion, however, is not stronger than the All-Nodes criterion. This is caused by the fact that programs may contain statements which only refer to constants. For the program
	if a	b
then print(0) else print(1)
the All-Uses criterion will be satisfied by any non-empty test set, since this criterion does not require that each statement be executed. If we ignore references to constants, the All-Uses criterion is stronger than the All-Nodes criterion. With the same exception, the All-Uses criterion is also stronger than the All-Edges criterion.
A problem with any graph-based adequacy criterion is that it can only deal with paths that can be executed (feasible paths). Paths which cannot be executed are known as infeasible paths. Infeasible paths result if parts of the graph are unreachable, as in
if true
then x:= 1 else x:= 2
The else-branch is never executed, yet most adequacy criteria require this branch to be taken. Paths that are infeasible also result from loops. If a loop is of the form
for i from 1 to 10 do body
there will be no feasible paths that traverse the resulting cycle in the graph any other than ten times.
There does not exist a simple linear scale along which the strength of all program-based adequacy criteria can be depicted. For the criteria discussed in sections 13.5--13.7, the subsume hierarchy is depicted in figure 13.17, as far as it is known. An arrow A B indicates that A is stronger than (subsumes) B. In most cases, the subsume relation holds for both the feasible and not feasible versions of the criteria. Arrows adorned with an asterisk denote relations which hold only for the not feasible version.
The subsume relation compares the thoroughness of test techniques, not their ability to detect faults. Especially if an adequacy criterion is used in an a priori sense, i.e. if it is used to generate the next test case, the subsume relations of figure 13.17 do not necessarily imply better fault detection. However, if some other tool is used to generate test cases, and the criterion is only used a posteriori to decide when to stop testing, a stronger adequacy criterion implies better fault-detection ability as well.
The theoretical upper bounds for the number of test cases needed to satisfy most of the coverage-based adequacy criteria are quadratic or exponential. Empirical studies, however, show that, in practice, these criteria are usually linear in the number of conditional statements.
13.8.2	Properties of Test Adequacy Criteria
A major problem with any test technique is to decide when to stop testing. As noted, functional and structural test techniques provide only weak means for doing so. Weyuker (1988) provides an interesting set of properties of test adequacy criteria. Although it is intuitively clear that any test adequacy criterion should satisfy all of the properties listed, it turns out that even some of the well-known test techniques such as All-Nodes coverage and All-Edges coverage fail to satisfy several of them.
The characteristics identified relate to program-based adequacy criteria, i.e. criteria that involve the programs structure. The first four criteria, however, are fairly general and should apply to any test adequacy criterion. The following 11 properties are identified in (Weyuker, 1988) :
 
Figure 13.17	Subsume hierarchy for program-based adequacy criteria Applicability property For every program, there exists an adequate test set. Exhaustive testing obviously satisfies this criterion but, in general, we will look for a reasonably-sized test set. Both All-Nodes and All-Edges coverage criteria do not fulfill this property. If the program contains unexecutable code, there simply are no tests to cover those parts of the program.
Non-exhaustive applicability property This property says that, even if exhaustive testing may be required in some cases, a criterion should certainly not require exhaustive testing in all circumstances.
Monotonicity property This property states that once a program has been adequately tested, running some additional tests can do no harm. Obviously, the additional tests may reveal further faults, but this does not deem the original test set inadequate. It merely improves the quality of the test process.
Inadequate empty set property The empty test set is not an adequate test set for any program. A test adequacy criterion should measure how well the testing process has been conducted. If a program has not been tested at all, it certainly has not been adequately tested.
Antiextensionality property This property states that semantic equivalence is not sufficient to imply that the programs are to be tested in the same way. For instance, routines BubbleSort and QuickSort are likely to require different test sets. This property is specific for program-based adequacy criteria, which depend on the implementation rather than the function being implemented. In a specification-based approach this property need not hold.
General multiple change property Whereas the previous property states that semantic closeness is not sufficient to imply that two programs can be tested in the same way, this property states that syntactic closeness is not sufficient either. Programs are said to be syntactically close if they have the same structure and the same dataflow characteristics. This is the case, for instance, when some of the relational or arithmetic operators in those programs differ. Though the shape of these programs is the same, testing them on the same data may well cause different paths through the flow graph being executed.
Antidecomposition property This property states that if a component is adequately tested in one environment, this does not imply that it is adequately tested for some other environment. Put in other words: if some assembly of components is adequately tested, this does not imply that the individual components have been adequately tested as well. For example, a sorting routine may well be adequately tested in an environment where the size of the array is always less than ten. If we move that routine to an environment which requires much larger arrays to be sorted, it must be tested anew in that environment.
Anticomposition property This property reflects just the opposite: even if components have been adequately tested in isolation, we still have to test their composition in order to ascertain that their interfaces and interactions work properly.
Renaming property If two programs differ only in inessential ways, as is the case when different variable names are used, then an adequate test set for one of these programs also suffices for the other.
Complexity property Intuitively, more complex programs require more testing. This property reflects this intuition by stating that for every program there exists other programs that require more testing.
Statement coverage property One central property of program-based adequacy criteria is that they should at least cause every executable statement of the program to be executed.
As noted, the All-Nodes and All-Edges coverage metrics fail to satisfy the applicability criterion. This is rather unsatisfactory, since it implies that we may not be able to decide whether testing has been adequate. If a 50% coverage has been obtained using either of these criteria, we do not know whether additional tests will help. It may be that the other 50% of the statements or branches is not executed by any input.
Both the All-Nodes and All-edges criteria do not satisfy the antidecomposition and anticomposition criteria either. For example, if all statements of individual components are executed using some given test set, then this same test set is likely to satisfy that criterion on their composition. Further research along these lines is expected to deepen our insight into what test techniques may or may not accomplish.
	13.8.3	Experimental Results
When one vacuums a rug in one direction only, one is likely to pick up less dirt than if the vacuuming occurs in two directions.
(Cha et al., 1988, p. 386)
The most common techniques for unit testing have been discussed in the previous sections. The effectiveness of those techniques is discussed in (Basili and Selby, 1987). There, Basili and Selby describe an experiment in which both professional programmers and students participated. Three techniques were compared:
	stepwise abstraction;
	functional testing based on equivalence classes and boundary value analysis (see section 13.7);
	structural testing with 100% statement coverage.
Basili and Selby compared the effectiveness of these techniques as regards detecting faults, the associated costs, and the kinds of faults found. Some of the results of this experiment were:
The professional programmers detected more faults with stepwise abstraction. Also, they did so faster than with the other techniques. They discovered more faults with functional testing as compared with structural testing. The speed with which they did so did not differ.
In one group of students, the various test techniques yielded the same results as regards the number of faults found. In a second group, structural testing turned out to be inferior to both other techniques. The speed with which faults were detected did not differ.
The number of faults found, the speed of fault detection, and the total effort needed depended upon the kind of program being tested.
More interface faults were found with stepwise abstraction.
More faults in the control structure were found with functional testing.
Other experiments also indicate that there is no uniform best test technique. Different test techniques tend to reveal different types of fault. The use of multiple test techniques certainly results in the discovery of more faults. It is difficult though to ascribe the discovery of faults to the use of a specific technique. It may well be that the mere fact that test techniques force us to pay systematic attention to the software is largely responsible for their success.
Several studies have reported on the fault detection capabilities of (Fagan) inspections. Myers (1988) reports that about 85% of the major errors in the Space Shuttle software were found during early inspections. Inspections have been found to be superior to other manual techniques such as walkthroughs. Inspections were also found to have the additional benefit of improving both quality and productivity. There is some controversy about the added value of group meetings.
Finally, there is ample empirical evidence that early attention to fault detection and removal really pays off. Boehms data presented in the introduction to this chapter can be augmented by other results, such as those of (Collofello and Woodfield, 1989). His data stem from a large real-time software project, consisting of about 700 000 lines of code developed by over 400 people. Some of his findings are reproduced in figure 13.18. For example, of the 676 design faults that could have been caught, 365 were caught during the design review (=54%). The overall design review efficiency was not much different from code review efficiency, while the testing phase was somewhat less efficient. The latter is not all that surprising, since the design and code reviews are likely to have removed many of the faults that were easy to detect. These results again suggest that the use of multiple techniques is preferable to the use of a single technique.
The results become much more skewed if we take into account the costeffectiveness of the different test techniques. The cost-effectiveness metric used is the ratio of costs saved by the process to costs consumed by the process. The costs saved by the process are the costs that would have been spent if the process had not been performed and faults had to have been corrected later. The cost-effectiveness results found in this study are given in figure 13.19. These results indicate that, for every hour spent in design reviews and correcting design faults, more than eight hours of work are saved. The cost-effectiveness of the testing phase itself is remarkably low. This is not really surprising, since much time is wasted during the actual testing phase in performing tests that do not reveal any faults. These findings once more confirm the statement that early testing really pays off.
	% of design faults	% of coding faults	Combined
	found	found	efficiency
Design review	54	--	54
Code review	33	84	64
Testing	38	38	38
	Figure 13.18	Fault-detection efficiency
Design review	Code review	Testing
8.44	1.38	0.17
	Figure 13.19	Cost-effectiveness results found in (Collofello and Woodfield, 1989)
	13.9	Different Test Stages
During the design phase, the system to be built has been decomposed into components. Generally, these components form some hierarchical structure. During testing, we will often let ourselves be led by this structure. We do not immediately start to test the system as a whole but start by testing the individual components (called unit
 
13.9. DIFFERENT TEST STAGES
testing). Next, these components are incrementally integrated into a system. Testing the composition of components is called integration testing.
In doing this, we may take one of two approaches. In the first approach, we start by testing the low-level components which are then integrated and coupled with components at the next higher level. The subsystem thus obtained is tested next. Then gradually we move towards the highest-level components. This is known as bottom-up testing. The alternative approach is top-down testing. In top-down testing, the top-level components are tested first and are gradually integrated with lower-level components.
In bottom-up testing, we often have to simulate the environment in which the component being tested is to be integrated. This an environment is called a test driver. In top-down testing the opposite is true: we have to simulate lower-level components, through so-called test stubs.
Both methods have advantages and disadvantages. For instance, in bottom-up testing it may be difficult to get a sound impression of the final system during the early stages of testing because whilst the top-level components are not integrated, there is no system, only bits and pieces. With top-down testing, on the other hand, writing the stubs can be rather laborious. If the implementation strategy is one whereby a skeletal system is built first and then populated with components, this skeletal system can be used as a test driver and the test order then becomes much less of an issue.
In practice, it is often useful to combine both methods. It is not necessarily the case that some given design or implementation technique drives us in selecting a particular test technique. If the testing is to partly parallel the implementation, ordering constraints induced by the order of implementation have to be obeyed, though.
The program-based adequacy criteria make use of an underlying language model. Subtle differences in this underlying model may lead to subtle differences in the resulting flow graphs as used in coverage-based criteria, for instance. Roughly speaking, the results reported hold at the level of a procedure or subroutine in languages like FORTRAN, Pascal, and so on.
As a consequence, the corresponding test techniques apply at the level of individual methods in object-oriented programs. Testing larger components of OO programs, such as parameterized classes or classes that inherit part of their functionality from other classes, resembles regression testing as done during maintenance. We then have to decide how much retesting should be done if methods are redefined in a subclass, or a class is instantiated with another type as a parameter.
Other forms of testing exist besides unit testing and integration testing. One possibility is to test the whole system against the user documentation and requirements specification after integration testing has finished. This is called the system test. A similar type of testing is often performed under supervision of the user organization and is then called acceptance testing. During acceptance testing, emphasis is on testing the usability of the system, rather than compliance of the code against some specification. Acceptance testing is a major criterion upon which the decision to accept or reject a system is based. In order to ensure a proper delivery of all necessary artifacts of a software development project, it is useful to let the future maintenance organization have a right of veto in the acceptance testing process.
If the system has to become operational in an environment different from the one in which it has been developed, a separate installation test is usually performed.
The test techniques discussed in the previous sections are often applied during unit and integration testing. When testing the system as a whole, the tests often use random input, albeit that the input is chosen such that it is representative of the systems operational use. Such tests can also be used to quantitatively assess the systems reliability. Software reliability is the topic of section 13.10.
The use of random input as test data has proven to be successful in the Cleanroom development method. In several experiments, it was found that aselect testing resulted in a high degree of statement and branch coverage. If a branch was not executed, it often concerned the treatment of an exceptional case.
	13.10	Estimating Software Reliability
In much of this book the reader will find references to the fact that most software does not function perfectly. Faults are found in almost every run-of-the-mill software system: the software is not 100% reliable. In this section we concentrate on quantitative, statistical, notions of software reliability.
One benefit of such information is that it can be put to use in planning our maintenance effort. Another reason for collecting reliability information could be contractual obligations regarding a required reliability level. Software for telephone switching systems, for instance, requires such quantitative knowledge of the systems expected availability. We need to know what the probability is of wrong connections being due to faults in the software.
A second application of reliability data is found in testing. A major problem with testing is deciding when to stop. One possibility is to base this decision on reaching a certain reliability level. If the required reliability level is not reached, we need an estimate of the time it will take to reach that level.
In order to be able to answer this type of question, a number of software reliability models have been developed which strongly resemble the well-known hardware reliability models. These are statistical models where the starting point is a certain probability distribution for expected failures. The precise distribution is not known a priori. We must measure the points in time at which the first failures occur and look for a probability distribution that fits those data. We can then make predictions using the probability distribution just obtained.
In this section we will concentrate on two models which are not too complicated and yet yield fairly good results: the basic execution time model and the logarithmic
Poisson execution time model.
The goal of many test techniques discussed in this chapter is to find as many faults as possible. What we in fact observe are manifestations of faults, i.e. failures. The system fails if the output does not meet the specification. Faults in a program are static in nature, failures are dynamic. A program can fail only when it is executed. From the users point of view, failures are much more important than faults. For example, a fault in a piece of software that is never, or hardly ever, used is, in general, less important than a fault which manifests itself frequently. Also, one and the same fault may show up in different ways and a failure may be caused by more than one fault.
In the following discussion on reliability, we will not be concerned with the expected number of faults in a program. Rather, the emphasis will be on the expected number of failures. The notion of time plays an essential role. For the moment, we will define reliability as: the probability that the program will not fail during a certain period of time.
The notion of time deserves further attention. Ultimately, we are interested in statements regarding calendar time. For example, we might want to know the probability that a given system will not fail in a one-week time period, or we might be interested in the number of weeks of system testing still needed to reach a certain reliability level.
Both models discussed below use the notion of execution time. Execution time is the time spent by the machine actually executing the software. Reliability models based on execution time yield better results than those based on calendar time. In many cases, an a posteriori translation of execution time to calendar time is possible. To emphasize this distinction, execution time will be denoted by and calendar time by .
The failure behavior of a program depends on many factors: quality of the designers, complexity of the system, development techniques used, etc. Most of these cannot adequately be dealt with as variables in a reliability model and therefore are assumed to be fixed. Reliability, when discussed in this section, will therefore always concern one specific project.
Some factors affecting failure behavior can be dealt with, though. As noticed before, the models discussed are based on the notion of execution time. This is simple to measure if we run one application on a stand-alone computer. Translation between machines that differ in speed can be taken care of relatively easily. Even if the machine is used in multiprogramming mode, translation from the time measured to proper execution time may be possible. This is the case, for instance, if time is relatively uniformly distributed over the applications being executed.
The input to a program is also variable. Since we estimate the models parameters on the basis of failures observed, the predictions made will only hold insofar as future input resembles the input which led to the observed failure behavior. The future has to resemble the past. In order to get reliable predictions, the tests must be representative of the later operational use of the system. If we are able to allocate the possible inputs to different equivalence classes, simple readjustments are possible here too.
We may summarize this discussion by including the environment in the definition of our notion of software reliability. Reliability then is defined as the probability that a system will not fail during a certain period of time in a certain environment.
Finally, software systems are not static entities. Software is often implemented and tested incrementally. Reliability of an evolving system is difficult to express. In the ensuing discussion, we therefore assume that our systems are stable over time.
We may characterize the failure behavior of software in different ways. For example, we may consider the expected time to the next failure, the expected time interval between successive failures, or the expected number of failures in a certain time interval. In all cases, we are concerned with random variables, since we do not know exactly when the software will fail. There are at least two reasons for this uncertainty. Firstly, we do not know where the programmer made errors. Secondly, the relation between a certain input and the order in which the corresponding set of instructions is being executed is not usually known. We may therefore model subsequent failures as a stochastic process. Such a stochastic process is characterized by, amongst other things, the form and probability distribution of the random variables.
When the software fails, we try to locate and repair the fault that caused this failure. In particular, this situation arises during the test phase of the software life cycle. Since we assume a stable situation, the application of reliability models is particularly appropriate during system testing, when the individual components have been integrated into one system. This system-test situation in particular will be discussed below.
In this situation, the failure behavior will not follow a constant pattern but will change over time, since faults detected are subsequently repaired. A stochastic process whose probability distribution changes over time is called non-homogeneous. The variation in time between successive failures can be described in terms of a function which denotes the average number of failures until time . Alternatively, we may consider the failure intensity function , the average number of failures per unit of time at time . then is the derivative of . If the reliability of a program increases through fault correction, the failure intensity will decrease.
The relationship between , and is graphically depicted in figure 13.20. The models to be discussed below, the basic execution time model (BM) and the logarithmic Poisson execution time model (LPM), differ in the form of the failure intensity function .
Both BM and LPM assume that failures occur according to a non-homogeneous Poisson process. Poisson processes are often used to describe the stochastic behavior of real-world events. Examples of Poisson processes are: the number of telephone calls expected in a given period of time, or the expected number of car accidents in a given period of time. In our case, the processes are non-homogeneous, since the failure intensity changes as a function of time, assuming a (partly) successful effort to repair the underlying errors.
In BM, the decrease in failure intensity, as a function of the number of failures observed, is constant. The contribution to the decrease in failure intensity thus is the same for each failure observed. In terms of the mean number of failures observed ( ), we obtain
Here,	denotes the initial failure intensity, i.e. the failure intensity at time 0.
 
Figure 13.20 Failure intensity and mean failures as functions of (Source: J.D. Musa, A. Iannino and K. Okumoto, Software Reilability, Copyright McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1987. Reproduced by permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)
denotes the number of failures observed if the program is executed for an infinite time period. Note that, since is the derivative of , and both are functions of , in fact only depends on . We will return to this later.
In LPM, the first failure contributes more to the decrease in failure intensity than any subsequent failures. More precisely, the failure intensity is exponential in the number of failures observed. We then get:
In this model, denotes the decrease in failure intensity. For both models, the relation between and is depicted in figure 13.21. (Note that the two curves intersect in this picture. This need not necessarily be the case. It depends on the actual values of the model parameters.)
Both models have two parameters: and for BM, and and for LPM. These parameters have yet to be determined, for instance from the observed failure behavior during a certain period of time.
 
Figure 13.21 Failure intensity as a function of (Source: J.D. Musa, A. Iannino and K. Okumoto, Software Reilability, Copyright McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1987. Reproduced by permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)
We can explain the shape of these functions as follows: given a certain input, the program in question will execute a certain sequence of instructions. A completely different input may result in a completely different sequence of instructions to be executed. We may partition all possible inputs into a number of classes such that input from any one class results in the execution of the same sequence of instructions. Some example classes could be a certain type of command in an operating system or a certain type of transaction in a database system.
The user will select input from the various possible classes according to some probability distribution. We define the operational profile as the set of possible input classes together with the probabilities that input from those classes is selected.
The basic execution time model implies a uniform operational profile. If all input classes are selected equally often, the various faults have an equal probability of manifesting themselves. Correction of any of those faults then contributes the same amount to the decrease in failure intensity. It has been found that BM still models the situation fairly well in the case of a fairly non-uniform operational profile.
With a strong non-uniform operational profile the failure intensity curve will have a convex shape, as in LPM. Some input classes will then be selected relatively often. As a consequence, certain faults will show up earlier and be corrected sooner. These corrections will have a larger impact on the decrease in failure intensity.
In both models,	and	are functions of	(execution time). Furthermore, failure intensity	is the derivative of mean failures	. For BM, we may therefore write
as
 
Solving this differential equation yields
and
In a similar way, we obtain for LPM: and
For LPM, the expected number of failures in infinite time is infinite. Obviously, the number of failures observed during testing is finite.
Both models allow that fault correction is not perfect. In BM the effectiveness of fault correction is constant, though not necessarily 100%. This again shows up in the linearity of the failure intensity function. In LPM, the effectiveness of fault correction decreases with time. Possible reasons could be that it becomes increasingly more difficult to locate the faults, for example because the software becomes less structured, or the personnel less motivated.
If the software has become operational and faults are not being corrected any more, the failure intensity will remain constant. Both models then reduce to a homogeneous Poisson process with failure intensity as the parameter. The number of failures expected in a certain time period will then follow a Poisson-distribution. The probability of exactly failures being observed in a time period of length is then given by
	The probability of 0 failures in a time frame of length	then is	.
This is precisely what we earlier denoted by the term software reliability.
Given a choice of one of the models BM or LPM, we are next faced with the question of how to estimate the models parameters. We may do so by measuring the points in time at which the first failures occur. This gives us points . These points can be translated into pairs . We may then determine the models parameters so that the resulting curve fits the set of measuring points. Techniques like Maximum Likelihood or Least Squares are suited for this.
Once these parameters have been determined, predictions can be made. For example, suppose the measured data result in a present failure intensity and the required failure intensity is . If we denote the additional test time required to reach failure intensity by , then we obtain for BM:
And for LPM we get
Obviously, we may also start from the equations for . We then obtain estimates for the number of failures that have yet to be observed before the required failure intensity level is reached.
For BM, this extrapolation is graphically depicted in figure 13.22. Since estimating the models parameters is a statistical process, we do not actually obtain one solution. Rather, we get reliability intervals. Such a reliability interval denotes the interval which will contain a parameter with a certain probability. For example, may be in the interval [80,100] with probability 0.75. So the curve in figure 13.22 is actually a band. The narrower this band is, the more accurately the parameters have been estimated for the same reliability of the interval. In general the estimates will be more accurate if they are based on more data.
In the above discussion, we used the notion of execution time. That calendar time is a less useful notion on which to base our model can be seen as follows: suppose the points in time at which the first failures occurred were expressed in terms of calendar time. Suppose also that we try to correct a fault as soon as it manifests itself. If the manpower available for fault correction is limited, and this manpower is capable of solving a fixed number of problems per day, the failure intensity will be constant if it is based on calendar time. We then do not observe any progress.
Quite a few reliability models have been proposed in the literature. The major differences concern the total number of failures (finite or infinite) that can be experienced in infinite time and the distribution of the failures experienced at a given point in time (Poisson, binomial, etc.).
An important question then arises as to which model to choose. By studying a number of failure data sets, it has been observed that no one model is consistently the best. We therefore have to look for the model that gives the best prediction on a
 
13.11. SUMMARY
 
Figure 13.22 A conceptual view of the parameter-estimating process (Source: J.D. Musa,
A. Iannino and K. Okumoto, Software Reilability, Copyright McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1987. Reproduced by permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)
project-by-project basis. Since we do not know in advance which model will perform best, it is wise to adopt an eclectic approach, and use a number of different models simultaneously.
13.11	Summary
In this chapter we discussed a great number of test techniques. We emphasized the importance of early fault detection. It is important to pay attention to testing during the early stages of the software development process. Early testing activities are the ones that are most cost effective. Early testing activities provide opportunities to prevent errors from being made in the first place. An extreme form hereof is test-driven development, where writing tests is the very first thing we do.
In practice, the various manual test techniques seem to be used most often. They turn out to be at least as successful as the various structural and functional techniques. Inspections in particular have been found to be a very cost-effective test technique. Next to the test techniques used, a major element in software fault detection and removal is the choice of personnel -- some people are significantly better at finding and removing faults than others.
Since exhaustive testing is generally not feasible, we have to select an adequate set of test cases. Test techniques can be classified according to the criterion used to measure the adequacy of this a test set. Three broad categories of test adequacy criteria can be distinguished:
	Coverage-based testing, in which testing requirements are specified in terms of the coverage of the product to be tested, for example, the percentage of statements executed.
	Fault-based testing, in which the focus is on detecting faults, for example, the percentage of seeded faults detected.
	Error-based testing, which focuses on testing error-prone points, such as 0, 1, or the upper bound of an array.
A test adequacy criterion can be used as stopping rule, as a measurement instrument, or as a generator of test cases. Test adequacy criteria and the corresponding test techniques can be viewed as two sides of the same coin. A coverage-based test technique makes it easy to measure coverage-based criteria, but does not help us in assessing whether all error-prone points have been tested.
Experimental evaluations show that there is no uniform best test technique. Different techniques tend to reveal different types of error. It is therefore wise to vacuum the carpet in more than one direction.
One line of research addresses the relative power of test adequacy criteria. A well-known measure to compare program-based test adequacy criteria is the subsume relation: criterion X subsumes Y if, for all programs P and all test sets T, X-adequacy implies Y-adequacy. Many of the well-known adequacy criteria have been related to one another in a subsume hierarchy.
As with any other life cycle activity, testing has to be carefully planned, controlled, and documented. Some of the IEEE Standards provide useful guidelines for doing this (IEEE829, 1998; IEEE1012, 1986).
The last part of this chapter was devoted to a discussion of how to quantitatively estimate the reliability of a piece of software. The currently-available software reliability models are limited in their immediate practical value. In particular, no model consistently performs best.
13.12	Further Reading
Well-known textbooks on testing are (Myers, 1979) (or its updated version (Myers, 2004)) and (Beizer, 1995). Whittaker (2000) gives a concise overview of the field. For a further discussion of safety issues, see (Leveson, 1991). Fault-tree analysis is discussed in (Leveson, 1986). Zhu et al. (1997) gives a very good overview of the types of test strategy discussed in sections 13.5--13.7 and the associated adequacy criteria. Rothermel and Harrold (1996) and Harrold (1999) give a very good overview of regression test techniques. Testing object-oriented software is addressed in (Binder, 2000).
The first attempts at developing some theory on testing date back to the 1970s (Goodenough and Gerhart, 1975), (Howden, 1982), and (Howden, 1985). Thereafter, much of that research has been directed towards finding and relating test adequacy criteria (Weyuker, 1988), (Clarke et al., 1989), (Weyuker, 1990), (Frankl and Weyuker, 1993a), (Frankl and Weyuker, 1993b), (Parrish and Zweben, 1995), and (Zhu, 1996). Experimental evaluations of test adequacy criteria can be found in (Frankl and Weiss, 1993), (Weyuker, 1993), (Offutt and Lee, 1994), (Harrold et al., 1997), and (Frankl et al., 1997). Experiments that compare manual and functional or structural test techniques are reported upon in (Basili and Selby, 1987), (Kamsties and Lott, 1995), and (Wood et al., 1997). Juristo et al. (2004) give an overview of 25 years of testing technique experiments.
The Cleanroom development method is described in (Selby et al., 1987) and (Mills et al., 1987). Experiences with Cleanroom are discussed in (Currit et al., 1986) and (Trammell et al., 1992). Stepwise abstraction is described in (Linger et al., 1979).
Beck (2003) describes test-driven development. Janzen and Saiedian (2005) give a somewhat wider perspective on its potential. Hunt and Thomas (2003) is one of the many textbooks describing JUnit. Effects of test-driven development on productivity and errors are reported in (Maximilien and Williams, 2003) and (Erdogmus et al., 2005).
Inspections were introduced by Fagan in the 1970s (Fagan, 1976) and (Fagan, 1986). Gilb and Graham (1993) is a text book on inspections; Wiegers (2002) is a text book on peer reviews. There have been many experimental evaluations of inspections; see for instance (Knight and Myers, 1993), (Weller, 1993), (Grady and van Slack, 1994), (Porter et al., 1995), (Porter et al., 1997), (Porter et al., 1998) and (Biffl and Halling, 2002). Parnas and Lawford (2003a) and Parnas and Lawford (2003b) are introductions to two companion special journal issues on software inspections. Ciolkowski et al. (2003) discusses the state of the art in software reviews. The value of formal correctness proofs is disputed in (DeMillo et al., 1979). Heated debates in the literature show that this issue has by no means been resolv (Fetzer, 1988).
The basic execution time model and the logarithmic Poisson execution time model are extensively discussed, and compared with a number of other models, in Musa et al. (1987). Lyu (1995) is a very comprehensive source on software reliability. Experiences with software reliability modeling are reported in (Jeske and Zhang, 2005). Whittaker and Voas (2000) give criteria other than time and operational profile that affect reliability.
Exercises
1.	What is a test adequacy criterion? Which kinds of uses does it have?
2.	Describe the following categories of test technique: coverage-based testing, fault-based testing, and error-based testing.
3.	What assumptions underlie the mutation testing strategy?
4.	What is the difference between black-box testing and white-box testing?
5.	Define the following terms: error, fault, and failure.
6.	What is a Fagan inspection?
7.	What is test-driven development?
8.	Define the following categories of control-flow coverage: All-Paths coverage, All-Edges coverage, All-Statements coverage.
9.	Consider the following routine (in Modula-2):
procedure SiftDown(var A: array of integer; k, n: integer); var parent, child, insert, Ak: integer; begin parent:= k; child:= k + k; Ak:= A[k]; insert:= Ak;
loop if child	n then exit end; if child	n then if A[child]	A[child+1] then child:= child+1 end
end;
if insert	= A[child] then exit
else A[parent]:= A[child]; parent:= child; child:= child + child end
end;
A[parent]:= Ak end SiftDown;
(This operation performs the sift-down operation for heaps; if needed, you
may consult any text on data structures to learn more about heaps.) The routine is tested using the following input:
n = 5, k = 2,
A[1] = 80, A[2] = 60, A[3] = 90, A[4] = 70, A[5] = 10.
Will the above test yield a 100% statement coverage? If not, provide one or more additional test cases this that a 100% statement coverage is obtained.
10.	For the example routine from exercise 9, construct a test set that yields 100% branch coverage.
11.	For the example routine from exercise 9, construct a test set that achieves All-Uses coverage.
12.	Consider the following two program fragments:
Fragment 1:
found:= false; counter:= 1; while (counter	n) and (not found) do if table[counter] = element then found:= true end; counter:= counter + 1
end; if found then writeln (found) else writeln (not found) end;
Fragment 2:
found:= false; counter:= 1; while (counter	n) and (not found) do
found:= table[counter] = element; counter:= counter + 1
end; if found then writeln (found) else writeln (not found) end;
Can the same test set be used if we wish to achieve a 100% branch coverage for both fragments?
13.	What is mutation testing?
14.	Which assumptions underlie mutation testing? What does that say about the strengths and weaknesses of this testing technique?
15.	When is one testing technique stronger than another?
16.	What is the difference between a system test and an acceptance test?
17.	Contrast top-down and bottom-up integration testing.
18.	What is the major difference between the basic execution time model and the logarithmic Poisson execution time model of software reliability?
19.	Give a definition of software reliability. Give a rationale for the various parts of this definition.
20.	Why is it important to consider the operational profile of a system while assessing its reliability?
21.	Can you think of reasons why reliability models based on execution time yield better results than those based on calendar time?
22.	Can software reliability be determined objectively?
23.	Read (DeMillo et al., 1979) and both (Fetzer, 1988) and the reactions to it (cited in the bibliography entry for that article). Write a position paper on the role of correctness proofs in software development.
24.	For a (medium-sized) system you have developed, write a Software Verification and Validation Plan (SVVP) following IEEE Standard 1012. Which of the issues addressed by this standard were not dealt with during the actual development? Could a more thorough SVVP have improved the development and testing process?
25.	Consider the following sort routine:
procedure selectsort(var r: array [1 .. n] of integer); var j, k, small: integer;
begin
if n	1 then for k:= 1 to n - 1 do small:= k;
for j:= k + 1 to n do if r[j]	r[small] then small:= j end
end;
swap(r[k], r[small])
end
end
end selectsort;
Determine the function (by means of pre- and postconditions) of this routine using stepwise abstraction.
26.	Generate ten mutants of the procedure in exercise 20. Next, test these mutants using the following set of test cases:
	an empty array;
	an array of length 1;
	a sorted array of length 10;
	an array of 10 elements that all have the same value; 	an array of length 10 with random elements.
Which of these mutants stay alive? What does this tell you about the quality of these tests?
27.	Construct an example showing that the antidecomposition and anticomposition axioms from section 13.8.2 do not hold for the All-Nodes and All-Edges testing criteria. Why are these axioms important?
28.	With one or two fellow students or colleagues, inspect a requirements or design document not produced by yourself. Is the documentation sufficient to do a proper inspection? Discuss the findings of the process with the author of the document. Repeat the process with a document of which you are the author.
29.	Assess the strengths and weaknesses of:
	functional or structural testing,
	correctness proofs,
	random testing, and
	inspections for fault finding and confidence building, respectively.
30.	One way of testing a high-level document such as a requirements specification is to devise and discuss possible usage scenarios with prospective users of the system to be developed. What additional merits can this a technique have over other types of review?
31.	How do you personally feel about a Cleanroom-like approach to software development?
 
	456	SOFTWARE TESTING
32. Discuss the following claim: Reliability assessment is more important than testing. Can you think of reasons why both are needed?
14
Software Maintenance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To know about well-known categories of maintenance tasks and data on their distribution
To be able to discern major causes of maintenance problems
To be aware of reverse engineering, its limitations, and tools to support it
To appreciate different ways in which maintenance activities can be organized
To understand major differences between development and maintenance and the consequences thereof
Software maintenance is not limited to the correction of faults. A large part of maintenance deals with accommodating new or changed user requirements and adapting software to a changed environment. It is about evolution, rather than just maintenance. We discuss the various types of maintenance tasks, and how to organize them.
Like living organisms and most natural phenomena, software projects follow a life cycle that starts from emptiness, is followed by rapid growth during infancy, enters a long period of maturity, and then begins a cycle of decay that almost resembles senility. (Jones, 1989)
Software, unlike a child, does not grow smarter and more capable; unfortunately, it does seem to grow old and cranky.
(Lyons, 1981)
Consider UBank, a multinational bank, a typical large organization that is heavily dependent upon automation for its daily operation. UBank is the result of a number of mergers and takeovers.
UBank has hundreds of offices spread all over the world. It has a number of mainframes at a central site, as well as thousands of workstations and printers connected. It has internet connectivity, all over the world, and strives for availability. The workload is an enormous number of transactions per hour. The bank has hundreds of application systems averaging over 100 000 lines of code. Programs are written in a variety of languages, most notably COBOL, various 4GLs and JCL. The systems make use of huge databases implemented under IDMS, INGRES, and so on. Some of the basic information is shared by many systems.
Quite likely, the bank has no complete overview of its application portfolio. Because of the mergers and acquisitions, integration of applications is a big issue. There are many wrappers, bridges, and other temporary means to glue systems together. There are more people involved in maintaining UBanks information systems, than there are people involved in developing new systems for UBank.
There are many organizations like UBank, organizations whose portfolio of information systems is vital for their day-to-day operation. At the same time, these information systems are ageing and it becomes increasingly difficult to keep them up and running. An increasing percentage of the annual budget of these organizations is spent on keeping installed systems functioning properly.
It is estimated that there are more than 100 billion lines of code in production in the world. As much as 80% of it is unstructured, patched, and badly documented. It is a gargantuan task to keep these software systems operational: errors must be corrected, and systems must be adapted to changing environments and user needs. This is what software maintenance is about. Software maintenance is defined as (IEEE610, 1990):
 
The process of modifying a software system or component after delivery to correct faults, improve performance or other attributes, or adapt to a changed environment.
So software maintenance is, in particular, not limited to the correction of latent faults. The distinction between development and maintenance is fuzzy, to say the least. This makes it hard to very bold about percentages and types of maintenance categories. In section 14.1, we revisit the discussion about types of maintenance activities from chapter 1 and provide a more balanced view.
Changes in both the systems environment and user requirements are inevitable. Software models part of reality, and reality changes, whether we like it or not. So the software has to change too. It has to evolve. A large percentage of what we are used to calling maintenance, is actually evolution.
When looking for ways to reduce the maintenance problem, it is worth bearing in mind the classification of maintenance activities given in chapter 1. Possible solutions to be considered include:
Higher-quality code, better test procedures, better documentation and adherence to standards and conventions may help to save on corrective maintenance;
By anticipating changes during requirements engineering and design and by taking them into account during realization, future perfective and adaptive maintenance can be realized more easily. In particular, the explicit evaluation of a software architecture with respect to ease of change is to be recommended. Through its inheritance and virtual typing capabilities, the object-oriented development paradigm in particular offers opportunities for isolating parts that are susceptible to changes from those that are less so. Many design patterns are aimed at encapsulating change-prone elements;
Finer tuning to user needs may lead to savings in perfective maintenance. This may, for example, be achieved through prototyping techniques or a more intensive user participation during the requirements engineering and design phase;
Less maintenance is needed when less code is written. The sheer length of the source code is the main determinant of total cost, both during initial development and during maintenance. In particular, a 10% change in a module of 200 LOC is more expensive than a 20% change in a module of 100 LOC. The reuse of existing software in particular has a very direct impact on maintenance costs.
These possible actions are all concerned with initial software development. This is not surprising, since the key to better maintainable software is to be found there. All these issues have been discussed at great length in previous chapters.
Better initial development though will not automatically result in lower maintenance costs. Worse, Dekleva (1992) found exactly the opposite. He found that development projects with analysis and design phases that produce a logical presentation of the systems function incur higher maintenance cost than projects that did not produce such a presentation. The explanation is that the users eventually learn what can reasonably be asked during maintenance. If they know a structured approach has been followed, they expect enhancements can be asked for, and will be realized. So they will ask for enhancements. If they know no structured approach has been followed, they expect only the necessary bug fixing is feasible, and maintenance requests will remain moderate. So higher quality may well incur higher maintenance cost.
Maintenance problems are there to stay. Some of these problems are inherent -- systems degrade when they are changed over and over again -- while others are caused by simple facts of life: real development and maintenance activities are carried out in less than perfect ways. The major causes of the resulting maintenance problems are addressed in section 14.2.
This discussion of maintenance problems suggests two approaches to improve the situation. Section 14.3 discusses various ways to rediscover lost facts (what does this routine accomplish, which design underlies a given system, and the like) and restructure existing software systems in order to improve their maintainability.
The second approach, discussed in section 14.5, entails a number of organizational and managerial actions to improve software maintenance.
	14.1	Maintenance Categories Revisited
Let us recall part of the discussion from chapter 1. Following Lientz and Swanson (1980), we distinguished four types of maintenance activity :
Corrective maintenance deals with the repair of faults found.
Adaptive maintenance deals with adapting software to changes in the environment, such as new hardware or the next release of an operating system. Adaptive maintenance does not lead to changes in the systems functionality.
Perfective maintenance mainly deals with accommodating new or changed user requirements. It concerns functional enhancements to the system. Perfective maintenance also includes activities to increase the systems performance or to enhance its user interface.
Preventive maintenance concerns activities aimed at increasing the systems maintainability, such as updating documentation, adding comments, and improving the modular structure of the system.
14.1. MAINTENANCE CATEGORIES REVISITED
Notice that real maintenance activities -- the correction of faults -- accounts for about 25% of the total maintenance effort only. Half of the maintenance effort concerns changes to accommodate changing user needs, while the remaining 25% largely concerns adapting software to changes in the external environment (see figure 14.1).
Recall also that the total cost of system maintenance is estimated to comprise at least 50% of total life cycle costs. Similar figures hold for the personnel involved. Figure 14.2 gives an estimate of the number of people working in software development compared to software maintenance according to (Jones, 2006).
 
	Figure 14.1	Distribution of maintenance activities
Year	Development	Maintenance	Maintenance percentage
1975	350,000	75,000	17.65
1990	900,000	800,000	47.06
2005	775,000	2,500,000	76.34
	Figure 14.2	US distribution of developers and maintainers
The data in figure 14.1 are based on (Lientz and Swanson, 1980) and reflect the state of the practice in the 1970s. Later studies have shown that the situation has not changed for the better. Nosek and Palvia (1990) raised the major maintenance issues once again and came to the disturbing conclusion that maintenance problems have remained pretty much the same, notwithstanding advances in structured development methodologies and techniques. Other studies, such as Basili et al. (1996) give roughly the same results. The relative distribution of maintenance activities is about the same as it was 20 years ago. Systems though have become larger, maintenance staff has grown, there are more systems, and there is a definite trend to an increase in maintenance effort relative to development effort.
Some studies give results that are quite different from the general picture sketched above. Schach et al. (2003), for instance, investigated maintenance effort in three systems and found corrective maintenance percentages of 50% and more, and very low percentages for adaptive maintenance. There is no convincing argument for these differences.
In many organizations, the definition of software maintenance does not follow the IEEE definition. Some organizations for instance define change efforts larger than, say, three months, as development rather than maintenance. This blurs the picture even further. In practice also, people find it difficult to distinguish between adaptive and perfective maintenance. What remains then is a distinction between correcting fault and the rest. The latter mostly caters for 75% or more of the maintenance effort.
The maintenance categories from (Lientz and Swanson, 1980) refer to the software only. Keeping software alive incurs other costs too, though. For instance, new users must be trained, and the helpdesk needs to be staffed. Nowadays, it is not uncommon that these supporting costs account for around 25% of the cost of keeping a system deployed.
Another way to look at the distribution of maintenance cost and prevailing types of maintenance tasks is along the time dimension. We may distinguish the following maintenance life cycle stages:
During the introductory stage of a new system, most of the effort is spent on user support. Users have to be trained, and they will often contact the helpdesk for clarification.
Next follows a growth stage in which more and more users start to explore the systems possibilities. As far as maintenance is concerned, emphasis during this stage is on correcting faults.
The growth stage is followed by a period of maturity. Users know what the system can and cannot do, and ask for enhancements.
Finally, a period of decline sets in. Technology replacement, such as another platform or user interface kit, constitutes a major category of maintenance tasks during this period.
Successful maintenance requires knowledge of the application. After initial delivery, this knowledge usually is available. Either knowledge of the application is explicitly transferred to the maintenance organization via documentation, training, and the like, or the developers have become maintainers of the application they just developed. But over time, this knowledge vaporizes, and at some point in time, it has become scant. This point in time more or less coincides with the transition from the mature stage to the declining stage. The if it aint broken dont fix it adagium then becomes
14.2. MAJOR CAUSES OF MAINTENANCE PROBLEMS
prevalent. Bennett and Rajlich (2000) use the terms evolution stage and servicing stage to distinguish between the period in which the system can successfully evolve and the subsequent period where this is no longer the case. In the latter stage, changes become tactical. For example, necessary changes are realized through patches and wrappers.
Finally, we may consider the distribution of effort over the activities of a single maintenance task. For the code-related tasks, the main activities are:
Isolation The first activity is concerned with determining the part of the system (modules, classes) that needs to be changed.
Modification This concerns the actual changes. One or more components are adapted to accommodate the change.
Testing After the changes have been made, the system has to be tested anew (regression testing).
As a rule of thumb, isolation takes about 40% of effort, while the other two activities each take about 30%. This distribution is not the same for all types of maintenance. For corrective maintenance, isolation often takes an even larger share, while for adaptive maintenance tasks, the actual modification takes longer. During corrective maintenance, the fault that caused the failure has to be found, and this may take a lot of effort. Once it is found, the actual modification often is fairly small. For adaptive maintenance tasks, the reverse holds.
14.2	Major Causes of Maintenance Problems
The following story reveals many of the problems that befall a typical software maintenance organization. It is based on an anecdote once told by David Parnas and concerns the re-engineering of software for fighter planes.
The plane in question has two altimeters. The onboard software tries to read either meter and displays the result. The software for doing so is depicted in figure 14.3. The code is unstructured and does not contain any comments. With a little effort though its functioning can be discerned. A structured version of the same code is given in figure 14.4. What puzzles us is the meaning of the default value 3000. Why on earth does the system display the value 3000 (which, at first sight is not very peculiar) when both altimeters cannot be read?
The rationale for the default value could not be discerned from the (scarce or nonexistent) documentation. Eventually, the programmer who had written this code was traced. He said that, when writing this piece of code, he did not know what to display in case both altimeters were unreadable. So he asked one of the fighter pilots what their average flying altitude was. The pilot made a back-of-the-envelope calculation and came up with the above value: the average flying altitude is 3000 feet. Hence this fragment.
IF not-read1 (V1) GOTO DEF1; display (V1);
GOTO C;
DEF1: IF not-read2 (V2) GOTO DEF2; display (V2);
GOTO C;
DEF2: display (3000); C:
	Figure 14.3	Unstructured code to read altimeters
if read-meter1 (V1) then display (V1) else if read-meter2 (V2) then display (V2) else display (3000)
endif;
	Figure 14.4	Structured code to read altimeters
The person reengineering the software rightfully thought that this was not the proper way to react to malfunctioning hardware. Fighter planes either fly at a very high altitude or very close to the ground. They dont fly in between. So he contacted the officials in charge and asked permission to display a clear warning message instead, such as a flashing PULL UP.
The permission to change the value displayed was denied. Generations of fighter pilots were by now trained to react appropriately to the current default message. Their training manual even stated a warning phrase like If the altimeter reader displays the value 3000 for more than a second, PULL UP.
This story cant be true. Or can it? It does illustrate some of the major causes of maintenance problems:
	unstructured code,
	maintenance programmers having insufficient knowledge of the system or application domain. Understanding the rationale behind code is one of the most serious problems maintainers face.
	documentation being absent, out of date, or at best insufficient.
	software maintenance has a bad image (this is not illustrated by the anecdote but is definitely a maintenance problem).
14.2. MAJOR CAUSES OF MAINTENANCE PROBLEMS
Unstructured code is used here as a generic term for systems that are badly designed or coded. It manifests itself in a variety of ways: the use of gotos, long procedures, poor and inconsistent naming, high module complexity, weak cohesion and strong coupling, unreachable code, deeply-nested if statements, and so on.
Even if systems were originally designed and built well, they may have become harder to maintain in the course of time. Much software that is to be maintained was developed in the pre-structured programming era. Parts of it may still be written in assembly language. It was designed and written for machines with limited processing and memory capacities. It may have been moved to different hardware or software platforms more than once without its basic structure having changed.
This is not the whole story either. The bad structure of many present-day systems at both the design and code level is not solely caused by their age. As a result of their studies of the dynamics of software systems, Lehman and Belady formulated a series of Laws of Software Evolution (see also chapter 3). The ones that bear most on software maintenance are:
Law of continuing change A system that is being used undergoes continuing change, until it is judged more cost-effective to restructure the system or replace it by a completely new version.
Law of increasing complexity A program that is changed, becomes less and less structured (the entropy increases) and thus becomes more complex. One has to invest extra effort in order to avoid increasing complexity.
Large software systems tend to stay in production for a long time. After being put into production, enhancements are inevitable. As a consequence of the implementation of these enhancements, the entropy of software systems increases over time. The initial structure degrades and complexity increases. This in turn complicates future changes to the system. Such software systems show signs of arthritis. Preventive maintenance may delay the onset of entropy but, usually, only a limited amount of preventive maintenance is carried out.
Eventually, systems cannot be properly maintained any more. In practice, it is often impossible to completely replace old systems by new ones. Developing completely new systems from scratch is either too expensive, or they will contain too many residual errors to start with, or it is impossible to re-articulate the original requirements. Usually, a combination of these factors applies. Increasing attention is therefore given to ways to rejuvenate or recycle existing software systems, ways to create structured versions of existing operational systems in order that they become easier to maintain.
Entropy is not only caused by maintenance. In agile methods, such as XP, it is an accepted intermediate stage. These methods have an explicit step to improve the code. This is known as refactoring. Refactoring is based on identifying bad smells and rework the code to improve its design (see also section 14.3.1).
At a low level the code improvement process can be supported by tools such as code restructurers and reformatters. To get higher-level abstractions generally requires human guidance and a sufficient understanding of the system.
This leads us to the second maintenance problem: the scant knowledge maintenance programmers have of the system or application domain. Note that the lack of application domain knowledge pertains to software development in general (Curtis et al., 1988). The situation with respect to software maintenance is aggravated by the fact that there are usually scarce sources that can be used to build such an understanding. In many cases, the source code is the only reliable source. A major issue in software maintenance then is to gain a sufficient understanding of a system from its source code. The more spaghetti-like this code is, the less easy it becomes to disentangle it. An insufficient understanding results in changes that may have unforeseen ripple effects which in turn incurs further maintenance tasks.
Maintenance is also hampered if documentation is absent, insufficient, or out-ofdate. Experienced programmers have learnt to distrust documentation: a disappointing observation in itself, albeit realistic. During initial development, documentation often comes off badly because of deadlines and other time constraints. Maintenance itself often occurs in a quick-fix mode whereby the code is patched to accommodate changes. Technical documentation and other higher-level descriptions of the software then do not get updated. Maintenance programmers having to deal with these systems have become part historian, part detective, and part clairvoyant (Corby, 1989).
Careful working procedures and management attention could prevent such a situation from occurring. But even then we are not sure that the right type of documentation will result. Two issues deserve our attention in this respect:
A design rationale is often missing. Programmers and designers tend to document their final decisions, not the rationale for those decisions and the alternatives rejected. Maintenance programmers have to reconstruct this rationale and may easily make the wrong decisions.
In trying to comprehend a piece of software, programmers often operate in an opportunistic mode. Based on their programming knowledge, in terms of programming plans and other stereotyped solutions to problems, they hypothesize a reasonable structure. Problems arise if the code does not meet these assumptions.
Finally, the noun maintenance in itself has a negative connotation. Maintaining software is considered a second-rate job. Maintenance work is viewed as unchallenging and unrewarding. Preferably, new and inexperienced programmers are assigned to the maintenance group, possibly under the guidance of an experienced person. The more experienced people are to be found working on initial software development. In the structure of the organization, maintenance personnel ranks lower, both financially and organizationally, than programmers working on the development of new systems.
This tends to affect morale. Maintenance programmers are often not happy with their circumstances and try to change jobs as fast as possible. The high turnover of
 
maintenance programmers precludes them from becoming sufficiently familiar with the software to be maintained which in turn hampers future maintenance.
It would be far better to have a more positive attitude towards maintenance. Maintaining software is a very difficult job. The job content of a maintenance programmer is more demanding than the job content of a development programmer. The programs are usually written by other people, people who can often not be consulted because they have left the firm or are entangled in the development of new systems. When making changes in an existing system, one is bound by the very structure of that system. There is generally a strong time pressure on maintenance personnel. Maintenance work requires more skills and knowledge than development does. It is simply more difficult (Chapin, 1987).
The maintenance group is of vital importance. It is they who keep things going. It is their job to ensure that the software keeps pace with the ever-changing reality. Compared to software development, software maintenance has more impact on the well-being of an organization.
14.3	Reverse Engineering and Refactoring
What were doing now with reverse engineering is Archeology. Were trying to gain an understanding of existing systems by examining ancient artifacts and piecing together the software equivalent of broken clay pots. Then we look to restructuring and reengineering to save the clay.
(Chikofsky, 1990)
It is fashionable in our trade to coin new terms once in a while and offer them as a panacea to the software crisis. One of the magical terms is reverse engineering. It comes under different guises and means altogether different things to different people. In the discussion below we will use the terminology from (Chikofsky and Cross II, 1990). The different terms are illustrated in figure 14.5.
Chikofsky defines reverse engineering as the process of analyzing a subject system to
	identify the systems components and their interrelationships and
	create representations of the system in another form or at a higher level of abstraction.
According to this definition, reverse engineering only concerns inspection of a system. Adaptations of a system and any form of restructuring, such as changing gotos into structured control constructs, do not fall within the strict definition of reverse engineering. Reverse engineering is akin to the reconstruction of a lost blueprint. Retiling the bathroom or the addition of a new bedroom is an altogether different affair. If this distinction is not carefully made, the meaning of the term reverse engineering dilutes too much and it reduces to a fancy synonym for maintenance.
 
Figure 14.5	Reverse engineering and related notions (Source: E.J. Chikofsky & J.H. Cross II, Reverse engineering and design recovery, IEEE Software 7, 1 (1990) pp 13--18, 1990 IEEE.)
The above definition still leaves open the question whether or not the resulting description is at a higher level of abstraction. To emphasize the distinction, Chikofsky uses the notions of design recovery and redocumentation, respectively.
Redocumentation concerns the derivation of a semantically-equivalent description at the same level of abstraction. Examples of redocumentation are the transformation of a badly-indented program into one having a neat lay-out or the construction of a set of flowcharts for a given program.
Design recovery concerns the derivation of a semantically-equivalent description at a higher level of abstraction. Some people limit the term reverse engineering to efforts that result in higher level descriptions and thus equate the term to what we have termed design recovery.
Note that a 100% functional equivalence is difficult to achieve in reverse engineering. The person carrying out the process (the reengineer) may encounter errors in the original system and may want to correct those. Such errors may be deeply hidden in the original system and become much more troublesome in the reverse engineered system. The programming language may be incompletely defined and its implementation may depend on certain machine characteristics. Data equivalence may be difficult to achieve because of typing issues, approximations, data conversions, etc. In practice, it seems sensible to solve this issue by agreeing on some acceptance test for the reengineered system, thereby relaxing the 100% functional equivalence requirement.
Obviously, reverse engineering is often done in circumstances where the target system is adapted as well. Two important subclasses are restructuring and reengineering.
Restructuring concerns the transformation of a system from one representation to another, at the same level of abstraction. The functionality of the system does not change. The transformation of spaghetti-code to structured code is a form of restructuring. The redesign of a system (possibly after a design recovery step) is another example of restructuring. In agile methods, restructuring the code to improve its design is an explicit process step. There, it is known as refactoring. Refactoring is discussed in section 14.3.1.
Refactoring is a white-box method, in that it involves inspection of and changes to the code. It is also possible to modernize a system without touching the code. For example, a legacy system may be given a modern user interface. The old, text-based interface is then wrapped to yield, for example, a graphical user interface or a client running in a Web browser. This is a black box method. The code of the old system is not inspected. The input and output are simply redirected to the wrapper. Usability is increased, although the capabilities of the new type of interface are often not fully exploited. A similar black box technique can be used to switch to another database, or integrate systems through intermediate XML documents. A third black box wrapping technique is applied at the level of components, where both business logic and data are wrapped and next accessed through an interface as if it were, say, a JavaBean.
These wrapping techniques do not change the platform on which the software is running. If a platform change is involved in the restructuring effort of a legacy system, this is known as migration. Migration to another platform is often done in conjunction with value-adding activities such as a change of interface, or code improvements.
Restructuring is sometimes done in conjunction with efforts to convert existing software into reusable building blocks. Such reclamation efforts may well have higher (indirect) payoffs than the mere savings in maintenance expenditure for the particular system being restructured, especially if the effort concerns a family of similar systems. The latter is often done in combination with domain engineering and the development of a (reusable) architecture or framework.
With reengineering, also called renovation, real changes are made to the system. The reverse engineering step is followed by a traditional forward engineering step in which the required changes are incorporated.
Each of the above transformations starts from a given description of the system
to be transformed. In most cases this will be the program code, which may or may not be adequately documented. However, it is also possible to, say, restructure an existing design or to reconstruct a requirements specification for a given design. For these transformations too, the term reverse engineering applies.
Both reverse engineering and restructuring can be done manually, but it is a rather tiresome affair. Quite a number of tools have been developed to support these processes. These tools are discussed in section 14.3.3. There are, however, some inherent limitations as to how much can be achieved automatically. These limitations are discussed in section 14.3.2.
	14.3.1	Refactoring
The modern name for restructuring is refactoring. Refactoring has become popular as one of the practices from XP (see section 3.2.4). Of course, programmers have applied the technique in some form since the beginning of programming. . Quite often, refactoring activities are not explicitly planned, and occur somewhat unnoticed in the daily work of software developers. In XP and other agile methods, they are an explicit method step.
There are both arguments for and against refactoring. The classic engineering rule if it aintt broken dont fix it is a compelling argument against refactoring. On the other hand, the second law of software evolution tells us that software becomes increasingly complex over time. So we are forced to apply refactoring to keep the software maintainable. The arguments pro and con are both valid. It depends on the phase the software is in which argument is the decisive one. During the evolution stage, when knowledge about the system is still around, refactoring is a viable option. During the servicing stage, knowledge will have vaporized to some extent, and refactoring then may well introduce more problems than it solves. During that stage, one may decide for example to add a wrapper, and not touch the software anymore.
Refactoring is applied when the structure of the software is of substandard quality. Fowler (1999) used the term bad smells to indicate occurrences of substandard code quality. Fowler (1999) lists the following 22 bad smells :
Long Method A method that is too long.
Large Class A class that is too big, in terms of instance variables or methods.
Primitive Obsession The use of primitives, such as numbers, instead of small classes such as Dollar.
Long Parameter List A parameter list that is too long.
Data Clumps Groups of data items that are often used together, such as the height, width and color of a graphical object. If you remove one of the items, the rest doesnt make sense any more.
Switch Statements The use of type codes instead of polymorphism. This results in case statements all over the code
Temporary Field A class has a variable which is only used in some circumstances.
Refused Bequest A subclass which does not support all of the methods or data it inherits.
Alternative Classes with Different Interfaces Methods that do the same things but have different interfaces. For example, methods DisplayRectangle next to DisplayCircle.
Parallel Inheritance Hierarchies Two class hierarchies exist, and if one of them has to be extended, so has the other.
Lazy Class A class that isnt doing all that much. This might be the result of a previous refactoring operation.
Data Class A class that holds data, but little else.
Duplicate Code According to Fowler (1999), this is number one in the stink parade.
Speculative Generality Code has been created for which you anticipate some future need. But this future is unknown.
Message Chains An object asks for an object from another object, which in turn asks for an object from yet another object, and so on.
Middle Man A class delegates most of its tasks to other classes. Delegation is OK, but too much delegation is not.
Feature Envy A method is more tightly coupled to, i.e. interested in, other classes than the class where it is located.
Inappropriate Intimacy Two classes are coupled too tightly.
Divergent Change The same class needs to be changed for different reasons, e.g. each time a new database is added, and each time the user interface changes.
Shotgun Surgery This is the opposite of the Divergent Change smell: for every change, many classes have to be changed.
Incomplete Library Class A library doesnt offer all the functionality needed for the task at hand.
Comments Comments are bad if they compensate for low-quality code.
This is quite a long list, and somewhat hard to go through manually in each and every refactoring situation. Mantyla et al. (2003) gives a useful categorization of these bad smells into seven broad categories; see figure 14.6. These categories give handles as to the kind of situation one should look for when refactoring code.
Category	Bad smells
Bloaters	Long Method, Large Class, Primitive Obsession, Long Parameter List, Data Clumps
Object-Oriented Abusers	Switch Statements, Temporary Field, Refused Bequest, Alternative Classes with Different Interfaces, Parallel Inheritance Hierarchies
Change Preventers	Divergent Change, Shotgun Surgery
Dispensables	Lazy Class, Data Class, Duplicate Code, Speculative Generality
Encapsulators	Message Chains, Middle Man
Couplers	Feature Envy, Inapprorpiate Intimacy
Others	Incomplete Library Class, Comments
	Figure 14.6	Categories of bad smells
The first category, the Bloaters denote situations in which something has grown too large to handle effectively. The Primitive Obsession is placed there, because the functionality to handle the primitives has to be placed in some other class, which may then grow too large. The Object-Oriented Abusers denote situations where the possibilities of object orientation are not fully exploited. The Change Preventers hinder further evolution of the software. The Dispensables represent things that can be removed. The Encapsulators deal with data communication. The two smells in this category are opposite: decreasing one will increase the other. The Couplers represent situations where coupling is too high. The Others category finally contains the smells that do not fit another category.
Bad smells not only occur at the code level. At the design level, the evolution of system through successive releases may provide valuable information about bad smells. For example, if certain classes often change, or classes get introduced in one version, disappear in the next, and then reappear again, such merits closer inspection.
Fowler (1999) states that no set of metrics rivals informed human intuition. On the other hand, several of the metrics defined in section 12.1 do relate to a number of the bad smells listed above. For example, a high value for McCabes cyclomatic complexity could indicate the Switch Statement bad smell, while a high value for the Coupling Between Object Classes (CBO) metric could indicate a Feature Envy bad smell. Metrics thus may augment human intuition in the search for bad smells.
14.3.2	Inherent Limitations
If you pass an unstructured, unmodular mess through one of these restructuring systems, you end up with at best, a structured, unmodular mess.
(Wendel, 1986)
Reverse engineering will mostly not be limited to redocumentation in a narrow sense. We will often be inclined to ask why certain things are being done the way they are done, what the meaning is of a certain code fragment, and the like. We must therefore investigate how programmers go about studying program text. The relevance of these issues shows from results of a study into maintenance activities (Fjelstad and Hamlen, 1979), confirmed by Yu and Chen (2006):
maintenance programmers study the original program code about one and a half times as long as its documentation;
maintenance programmers spend as much time reading the code as they do implementing a change.
Insights into the discovery process which takes place during maintenance activities will give us the necessary insight to put various developments regarding reverse engineering and refactoring into perspective.
In forward engineering activities we usually proceed from high-level abstractions to low-level implementations. Information gets lost in the successive steps involved in this process. If we want to reverse the route, this information must be reconstructed. The object we start with, a piece of source code in general, usually offers insufficient clues for a full reconstruction.
The programmer uses various sources of information in his discovery process. For example, if the design documentation is available, that documentation will reveal something about the structure of the system. A characteristic situation in practice is that the source code is the only reliable source of information. So this source code has to be studied in order to discover the underlying abstractions. The question is how the programmer goes about doing this.
Several theories have been developed to describe this comprehension process. Common to these theories is that expert programmers may draw on a vast number of knowledge chunks. These knowledge chunks are called in when software is developed.
Within the realm of programming, it is postulated that experts know of programming plans or beacons. A programming plan is a program fragment that corresponds to a stereotypical action. For example, to compute the sum of a series of numbers, a programmer uses the running total loop plan. In this plan, some counter is initialized to zero and incremented with the next value of a series in the body of a loop. A beacon is a key feature that typically indicates the presence of a particular structure or operation. Beacons seem to be very diagnostic of program meaning. For example, the kernel idea or central operation in a sorting program is a swap operation. If we are presented with a program that contains a swap operation, our immediate reaction would then be that it concerns some sorting program.
This type of program comprehension process occurs when studying existing software. Meaningful units are isolated from the flat source text. Knowledge from human memory is called in during this process. The more knowledge the reader has about programming or the application domain, the more successful this process will be. The better the source code maps onto knowledge already available to the reader, the more effective this process will be.
During the comprehension process, the reader forms hypotheses and checks these hypotheses with the actual text. Well-structured programs and proper documentation ease this process. If application domain concepts map onto well-delineated program units then the program text will be more easily understood. If the structure of a program shows no relation with the structure of the application domain, or the reader cannot discern this structure, then understanding of the program text is seriously hampered.
As a side remark we note that there are two extreme strategies for studying program text:
	the as-needed strategy, and
	the systematic strategy.
In the as-needed strategy, program text is read from beginning to end like a piece of prose and hypotheses are formulated on the basis of local information. Inexperienced programmers in particular tend to fall back onto this strategy. In the systematic strategy, an overall understanding of the system is formed by a systematic top-down study of the program text. The systematic approach gives a better insight into causal relations between program components.
These causal relations play an important role when implementing changes. Socalled delocalized plans, in which conceptually related pieces of code are located in program parts that are physically wide apart, may seriously hamper maintenance activities. Excessive use of inheritance increases the use of delocalized plans. If our understanding is based on local clues only, modifications may easily result in socalled ripple-effects, i.e. changes that are locally correct but lead to new problems at different, unforeseen places. Use of the as-needed strategy increases the probability of ripple effects.
During the comprehension process the programmer uses knowledge that has its origin outside the program text proper. To illustrate this phenomenon, consider the program text from figure 14.7.
for i:= 1 to n do for j:= 1 to n do
if A[j, i] then
for k:= 1 to n do
if A[i, k] then A[j, k]:= true endif
enddo endif
enddo
enddo
	Figure 14.7	Warshalls algorithm to compute the transitive closure of a graph
The program fragment of figure 14.7 manipulates a boolean matrix A. Before this fragment is executed the matrix will have a certain value. The matrix is traversed in a rather complicated way (potentially, each element is visited n times) and once in a while an element of the array is set to true. But what does this fragment mean? What does it do?
An expert will recognize Warshalls algorithm. Warshalls algorithm computes the transitive closure of a relation (graph). The notions transitive closure, relation and graph have a precise meaning within a certain knowledge domain. If you dont know the meaning of these notions, you havent made any progress in understanding the algorithm either.
At yet another level of abstraction the meaning of this fragment could be described as follows. Suppose we start with a collection of cities. The relation states, for each pair of cities and , whether there is a direct rail connection between cities and
. The code fragment of figure 14.7 computes whether there is a connection at all (either direct or indirect) between each pair of cities.
Warshalls algorithm has many applications. If you know the algorithm, you will recognize the fragment reproduced in figure 14.7. If you dont know the algorithm, you will not discover the meaning of this fragment either.
As a second example, consider the code fragment of figure 14.8, adapted from
(Biggerstaff, 1989). The fragment will not mean much to you. Procedure and variable names are meaningless. A meaningful interpretation of this fragment is next to impossible.
The same code fragment is given in figure 14.9, though with meaningful names. From that version you may grasp that the routine has something to do with window management. The border of the current window is depicted in a lighter shade while procedure A(var x: w); begin b(y, n1); b(x, n2); m(w[x]); y:= x; r(p[x])
end;
	Figure 14.8	An incomprehensible code fragment
the border of another window gets highlighted. The cursor is positioned in the now highlighted window and the process of that window is restarted. If we add a few comments to the routine, its text becomes fairly easy to interpret. Meaningful names and comments together provide for an informal semantics of this code which suffice for a proper understanding.
This informal semantics goes much further than building local knowledge of the meaning of a component. Developers use naming conventions also to find their way around in a large system. Organizations often prescribe naming conventions precisely for this reason. When design and architecture documentation is not updated, these naming conventions serve as a proxy for that documentation.
procedure change window(var nw: window); begin border(current window, no highlight); border(nw, highlight); move cursor(w[nw]); current window:= nw; resume(process[nw])
end;
	Figure 14.9	Code fragment with meaningful names
Common to these two examples as well as the altimeter anecdote from section 14.2 is that we need outside information for a proper interpretation of the code fragments.
The outside information concerns concepts from a certain knowledge domain or a design rationale that was only present in the head of the programmer.
The window management example is illustrative for yet another reason. Tools manipulate sequences of symbols. In principle, tools do not have knowledge of the (external) meaning of the symbols being manipulated. In particular, a reverse engineering tool has no knowledge of windows, cursor and the like. These notions derive their meaning from the application domain, not from the program text itself. From the tool point of view, the texts of figures 14.8 and 14.9 are equally meaningful.
The above observations have repercussions for the degree to which tools can support the reverse engineering and restructuring process. Such tools cannot turn a badly-designed system into a good one. They cannot infer knowledge from a source text which is not already contained in that text without calling in external knowledge as an aid. In particular, completely automatic design recovery is not feasible. You cant make a pig out of a sausage.
14.3.3	Tools
During the reverse engineering process, the programmer builds an understanding of what the software is trying to accomplish and why things are done the way they are done. Several classes of tools may support the task of program understanding:
Tools to ease perceptual processes involved in program understanding (reformatters). Tools may for example produce a neat lay-out in which nested instructions are indented and blank lines are put between successive methods. More advanced tools print procedure names in a larger font or generate page headers which contain the name of the component, its version number, creation date, and the like.
Tools to gain insight into the static structure of programs. For example, tools that generate tables of contents and cross-reference listings help to trace the use of program elements. Browsers provide powerful interactive capabilities for inspecting the static structure of programs. Hypertext systems provide mechanisms to extend the traditional flat organization of text by their capabilities for linking non-sequential chunks of information. If system-related information is kept in a hypertext form, this opens up new possibilities for interactive, dynamic inspection of that information. Code analyzers may be used to identify potential trouble spots by computing software complexity metrics, highlighting dead code, or indicating questionable coding practices or bad smells. Finally, tools may generate a graphical image of a program text in the form of a control graph or a calling hierarchy. Tools may analyze the surface structure of large systems, e.g. by considering variable names, and cluster parts that seem to be highly related. The result of this clustering provides a first guess at a restructuring for the system.
Tools that inspect the version history of a system (see also section 14.4). These tools may for example highlight components that have been changed very often, indicating candidates for reengineering. Tools that identify pairs of components that have often changed together but are not logically related may indicate weak spots in the software architecture.
Tools to gain insight into the dynamic behavior of programs. Next to traditional text-oriented debugging systems there are systems which provide graphical capabilities to monitor program execution, e.g. to animate data structures or the execution flow.
Note that these tools provide support for maintenance tasks in general (alongside tools such as test coverage monitors, which keep track of program paths executed by a given set of test data, and source comparators, which identify changes between program versions). With respect to reverse engineering, the above tools may be classified as redocumentation tools. By far the majority of reverse engineering tools falls into this category.
Tools which result in a description at a higher level of abstraction (design recovery tools) have some inherent limitations, as argued in the previous section. Tools for design recovery need a model of the application domain in which the concepts from that domain are modeled in an explicit way, together with their mutual dependencies and interrelations. Completely automatic design recovery is not feasible for the foreseeable future. Concepts from an application domain usually carry an informal semantics. Tools for design recovery may, in a dialog with the human user, search for patterns, make suggestions, indicate relations between components, etc. Such a tool may be termed a maintenance apprentice.
Many tools exist for restructuring program code. The history of these restructuring tools goes all the way back to the late 1960s. In 1966, Bo hm and Jacopini (1966) published a seminal paper in which it was shown that gotos are not necessary for creating programs. The roots of restructuring tools like Recoder (Bush, 1985) can be traced to the constructive proof given in Bo hm and Jacopinis paper. Recoder structures the control flow of Cobol programs. There is a wide choice of such Cobol restructuring tools.
Restructuring tools can be very valuable -- a well-structured program is usually easier to read and understand. A study reported by Gibson and Senn (1989) provides evidence that structural differences do affect maintenance performance. Specifically, it was found that eliminating gotos and redundancy appears to decrease both the time required to perform maintenance and the frequency of ripple effects.
Yet, the merit of restructuring tools is limited. They will not transform a flawed design into a good one.
	14.4	Software Evolution Revisited
Lehman and Belady studied the evolution of software systems and formulated their well-known laws of software evolution. Empirical studies have given general support for these laws.
Apparently, there is quite a bit of regularity in the evolution of software. We can use this insight and try to predict the future evolution of a specific system by looking at the actual evolution of that system till now. We then base our next action
 
14.4. SOFTWARE EVOLUTION REVISITED
on information from the past. We may for example decide which components to reengineer by looking at components that changed a lot in the recent past. The assumption then is that components that changed a lot in the recent past, are likely to change in the near future too. Grba et al. (2004) used the term yesterdays weather to characterize this idea: if we have no further information, we may guess that todays weather will be like yesterdays.
Grba and Ducasse (2006) distinguish two types of analysis of evolutionary data: version-centered analysis and history-centered analysis. In version-centered analysis, differences between successive versions of a system are studied. The results are typically depicted in a figure with time (i.e. successive versions) along one axis and the relevant aspects of the system on another. For example, we may consider the relative size of the different components of a system over time, as illustrated in figure 14.10 (adapted from (Grba and Ducasse, 2006)).
 
	Figure 14.10	Size versus version
Each rectangle in figure 14.10 denotes a component. The width and height of a rectangle each stand for an attribute of that component. The width may for instance denote the number of classes of a component, while the height denotes its number of interfaces. Figure 14.10 tells us that component A is stable and small, while component D is stable and big. Component C shows a steady growth from one version to the next, and component B exhibits some ripple effects in versions 2 and 3, and is stable since then.
In a history-centered analysis, a particular viewpoint is chosen, and the evolution of a system is depicted with respect to that viewpoint. For example, figure 14.11 shows how often different components are changed together. Each node denotes a component, and the thickness of the edges denotes how often two connected components are changed together (so-called co-changes). A thicker edge between components indicates more frequent co-changes. The latter information may for instance be derived from the versioning database.
 
	Figure 14.11	Components that change together
From figure 14.11 we learn that components /util/figs and /util/tools are changed together frequently. The same holds for components /util/tools and /workflow/paint. The names of the components suggest that components /util/figs and /util/tools are structurally related, while /util/tools and /workflow/paint are structurally unrelated. From this additional information, we might infer that the interaction between components /util/tools and /workflow/paint deserves our attention. Alternatively, we may label the components with the (external) features they participate in, and the view then shows whether changes frequently affect different features.
A version-centered analysis depicts the version information as-is. It is up to the user to detect any pattern. In figure 14.10, it is the user who has to detect growing or shrinking components; the picture just presents the facts. In a history-centered analysis, some hypothesis guides the representation, and the patterns are then encoded in the representation, as in figure 14.11.
14.5	Organizational and Managerial Issues
The duties of maintenance management are not different from those of other organizational functions, and software development in particular. In chapter 2 we identified five entities that require continuous attention of management:
	time, i.e. progress towards goals;
	information, in particular the integrity of the complete set of documents, including change requests;
	organization of the team, including coordination of activities;
	quality of the product and process;
	money, i.e. cost of the project.
In this section we address these issues from a maintenance perspective. We pay particular attention to issues that pose specific problems and challenges to maintenance. These issues are: the organization of maintenance activities, major differences between development and maintenance, the control of maintenance tasks, and quality assessment.
14.5.1	Organization of Maintenance Activities
The primary question to be addressed here is whether or not software maintenance should be assigned to a separate organizational unit. The following discussion is largely based on an insightful study of different forms of systems staff departmentalization presented in (Swanson and Beath, 1990). The authors of this article explore the strengths and weaknesses of three alternative bases for staff departmentalization. The three organizational forms with their focal strengths and weaknesses are listed in figure 14.12. We will sketch the W- and A-Type organizations and discuss the L-type organization with its pros and cons more elaborately.
Traditionally, departmentalization in software development tended to be according to work type (a W-Type scheme). In such a scheme, people analyze user needs, or design systems, or implement them, or test them, etc. Even though they cooperate in a team, each team member has quite separate responsibilities and roles.
In a W-Type scheme, work assignments may originate from both development and maintenance projects. For example, a designer may be involved in the design of a (sub)system in the context of some development project or in the design of a change to an existing system. Likewise, a programmer may implement an algorithm for a new system or realize changes in an operational program.
 
W-Type	Departmentalization by work type (analysis versus programming) Focal strength: development and specialization of programming knowledge and skills
Focal weakness: costs of coordination between systems analysts and programmers
A-Type	Departmentalization by application domain (application group A versus application group B)
Focal strength: development and specialization of application knowledge
Focal weakness: costs of coordination and integration among application groups
L-Type	Departmentalization by life-cycle phase (development versus maintenance)
Focal strength: development and specialization of service orientation and maintenance skills
Focal weakness: costs of coordination between development and maintenance units
 
Figure 14.12 Trade-offs between alternative organizational forms (Source: E.B. Swanson & C.M. Beath, Departmentalization in software development and maintenance, Communications of the ACM 33, 6 (1990) pp 658-667. Reproduced by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery, Inc.)
Note that the development of new systems does not occur in a vacuum. Designers of new systems will reuse existing designs and must take into account constraints imposed by existing systems. Programmers involved in development projects have to deal with interfaces to existing software, existing databases, etc. In the W-Type scheme, the distinction between development and maintenance work is primarily a distinction between different origins of the work assignment.
A second form of departmentalization is one according to application areas, the A-Type scheme. Nowadays, computerized applications have extended to almost all corners of the enterprise. Systems have become more diversified. Application domain expertise has become increasingly important for successful implementation of information systems. Deep knowledge of an application domain is a valuable but scarce resource. Nurturing of this expertise amongst staff is one way to increase quality and productivity in both development and maintenance. In larger organizations, we may therefore find units with particular expertise in certain application domains, like financial systems, office automation, or real-time process control.
Finally, we may departmentalize according to life-cycle phases, as is done in the L-Type scheme. In particular, we may distinguish between development and maintenance. With an increasing portfolio of systems to be maintained and the increasing business need of keeping the growing base of information systems working satisfactorily, the division of development and maintenance into separate organizational units is found more often.
Separating development and maintenance has both advantages and disadvantages. The major advantages are:
Clear accountability: we may clearly separate the cost and effort involved in maintenance activities from investments in new developments. If personnel are involved in both types of work, they have some freedom in charging their time. It is then more difficult to measure and predict the real cost of software maintenance.
Intermittent demands of maintenance make it difficult to predict and control progress of new system development. If people do both maintenance work and development, some control can be exercised by specifically allocating certain periods of time as maintenance periods. For instance, the first week of each calendar month may be set aside for maintenance. But even then, maintenance problems are rather unpredictable and some need immediate attention. Many a schedule slippage is due to the maintenance drain.
A separation of maintenance and development facilitates and motivates the maintenance organization to conduct a meaningful acceptance test before the system is taken into production. If such an acceptance test is not conducted explicitly, maintenance may be confronted with low-quality software or systems which still need a finishing touch which the development team has left undone for lack of time.
By specializing on maintenance tasks, a higher quality of user service can be realized. By their very nature, development groups are focused on system delivery, whereas maintenance people are service-oriented and find pride in satisfying user requests. We will further elaborate upon this issue in section 14.5.2.
By concentrating on the systems to be maintained, a higher level of productivity is achieved. Maintenance work requires specific skills of which a more optimal use can be made in a separate organization. If people are involved in both development and maintenance, more staff have to be allocated to maintenance and the familiarity with any particular system is spread more thinly.
On the other hand, the strict separation of development and maintenance has certain disadvantages as well:
Demotivation of personnel because of status differences, with consequential degradation of quality and productivity. Managerial attitudes and traditional career paths are the main causes for these motivational problems. Conversely, proper managerial attention to maintenance work goes a large way towards alleviating the morale problem. For example, an organization may decide to hire new people into development only and explicitly consider a transfer to maintenance as a promotion. (Most organizations do exactly the opposite.)
Loss of knowledge about the system (with respect to both its design and the application domain knowledge incorporated) when the system is transferred from development to maintenance. Various strategies can mitigate against this loss. For example, a future maintainer of a system may spend some time with the development team, a developer may stay with maintenance until the maintainers have become sufficiently acquainted with the system, or a designer may instruct the maintainers about the design of a system.
Coordination costs between development and maintenance, especially when the new system replaces an existing one.
Increased cost of system acceptance by the maintenance organization. If the system is explicitly carried over from development, certain quality and documentation criteria must be met. Within an A-type organization these requirements can often be relaxed a bit, or their fulfillment is postponed. It is by no means clear though that this really incurs an increase in cost. In the long run it may well be cheaper to only accept systems which pass a proper maintenance acceptance test.
Possible duplication of communication channels to the user organization.
Based on an analysis of existing departmentalizations and the resulting list of strengths and weaknesses, Swanson and Beath express a slight preference for having development and maintenance as separate organizational units. We concur with that. Careful procedures could be devised that overcome some or all of the disadvantages listed. We should stress that personnel demotivation is a real issue in many organizations. It deserves serious management attention.
Combinations of departmentalization types are also possible. In particular, combinations of A-type and L-type departmentalizations are quite common. So, within the maintenance organization, smaller groups may specialize in some application domain, i.e. a specific collection of information systems. This may be termed the L-A-scheme. Conversely, in an A-L-scheme a small maintenance unit is found within a group that specializes in a certain application area. The L-A-scheme is more likely to exhibit the advantages of the L-scheme than the A-L-scheme does.
Too much specialization is a lurking danger though. A system should never become someones private property. A variation of the reverse Peter principle applies here: people rise within an organization to a level at which they become indispensable. Job rotation is one way to avoid people from becoming too much entrenched in the peculiarities of a system. There is a trade-off though, since such a step also means that in-depth knowledge of a system is sacrificed.
14.5.2	Software Maintenance from a Service Perspective
Software maintenance organizations need to realize that they are in the customer service business.
(Pigoski, 1996)
Software development results in a product, a piece of software. Software maintenance can be seen as providing a service. There are notable differences between products and services, which mean that the quality of products and services is judged differently. As a consequence, the quality of software development and software maintenance is also judged differently and maintenance organizations should pay attention to service-specific quality aspects.
Apparently, this is not widely recognized yet. Within the software maintenance domain, the focus is still on product aspects. The final phases of software development supposedly concern the delivery of an operations manual, installing the software, handling change requests and fixing bugs. In practice, the role of an IT department is much broader during the deployment stage, as is illustrated by the ubiquitous help desk.
This is confirmed by Stalhane et al. (1997) who report on a survey to find those aspects of software quality that customers consider most important. The main insight to be gained from their study is the strong emphasis customers place on service quality. The top five factors found in their study are: service responsiveness, service capacity, product reliability, service efficiency, and product functionality. They also quote an interesting result from a quality study in the telecommunications domain. To the question Would you recommend others to buy from this company?, a 100% yes was obtained from the category of users that had complained and got a satisfactory result. For the category that had not complained, this percentage was 87%. Apparently, it is more important to get a satisfactory service than to have no problems at all.
The main differences between products and services are as follows:
Services are intangible, products are tangible. This is considered the most basic difference between products and services. Services -- being benefits or activities -- cannot be seen, felt, tasted, or touched, unlike products. Consequently, services cannot be counted, stored, patented, readily displayed, or communicated, and pricing is more difficult.
Because services are created by activities, and activities are performed by humans, services tend to be more heterogeneous than products. Customer satisfaction depends on employee actions during the service delivery. Service quality depends on factors which are difficult to control, such as the ability of customers to articulate their needs, the ability and willingness of personnel to satisfy those needs, the presence or absence of other customers, and the level of demand for the service. These complicating factors make it hard to know whether the service was delivered according to plan or specification.
Services are produced and consumed simultaneously, whereas production and consumption of products can be separated. For example, a car can be produced first, sold a few months later, and then be consumed over a period of several years. For services, production and consumption has to take place in parallel. The production of the service creates the set of benefits, whose consumption cannot be postponed. For example, a restaurant service -- preparing a meal and serving the customer -- by and large has to be produced while the customer is receiving the service. As a consequence, customers participate in and affect the transaction, customers may affect each other, employees affect the service outcome, and centralization and mass production are difficult.
Services are perishable, products are not. Services cannot be saved or stored. They cannot be returned or resold, and it is difficult to synchronize supply and demand.
The difference between products and services is not clear-cut. Often, services are augmented with physical products to make them more tangible. For example, luggage tags may be provided with a travel insurance. In the same way, products are augmented with add-on services, such as a guarantee, to improve the quality perception of the buyer. In the service marketing literature, a product--service continuum is used to indicate that there is no clear boundary between products and services. This product-service continuum has pure products at one end, pure services at the other, and product--service mixtures in between. Figure 14.13 shows some example products and services along this continuum.
 
Figure 14.13 The product--service continuum (Source: L.L. Berry & A. Parasuraman, Marketing Services: Competing Through Quality, 1991, The Free Press)
As this figure shows, products and services can be intertwined. In the case of fast-food, both the product, the food, and the service, quick delivery, are essential to the customer. The quality of such a product--service mix is judged on both product and service aspects: does the food taste good and is it served quickly.
Let us return to the software engineering domain. A major difference between software development and software maintenance is the fact that software development results in a product, whereas software maintenance results in a service being delivered to the customer. Software maintenance has more service-like aspects than software development, because the value of software maintenance lies in activities that result in benefits for the customers, such as corrected faults and new features. Contrast this with software development, where the development activities themselves do not provide benefits to the customer. It is the resulting software system that provides those benefits.
As noted, the difference between products and services is not clear-cut. Consequently, this goes for software development and software maintenance as well. Figure 14.14 shows the product--service continuum with examples from the software engineering domain.
 
Figure 14.14 The product--service continuum for software development and maintenance
Service marketeers often use the gap model to illustrate how differences between perceived service delivery and expected service may come about. This gap model is depicted in figure 14.15. Service quality is improved if those gaps are closed. The difference between the perceived quality and the expected quality (gap 5) is caused by four other gaps. These four gaps, and suggested solutions for bridging them, are:
Gap 1 The expected service as perceived by the service provider differs from the service as expected by the customer. In the field of software maintenance, this difference is often caused by an insufficient relationship focus of the service provider. For example, a maintenance department may aim to satisfy certain availability constraints such as 99% availability, while the actual customer concern is with maximum downtime.
 
Figure 14.15 The gaps model of service quality (Reprinted with permission from A. Parasuraman, V.A. Zeithaml & L.L. Berry, A Conceptual Model of Service Quality and its Implication for Future Research, in Journal of Marketing 49, Fall 1985, pp. 41-50. Published by the American Marketing Association.)
It is important for a maintenance organization to translate customer service expectations into clear service agreements. Preferably, the maintenance service commitments are specified in a contract -- the Service Level Agreement -which specifies, amongst other things, the services themselves, the levels of service (i.e. how fast and how reliably will the service be delivered), what happens if the service provider does not reach the agreed upon service levels, when and how the customer will receive reports regarding the services actually delivered, when and how the service level agreement will be reviewed, and so on.
Gap 2	The service specification differs from the expected service as perceived by the service provider. This may arise if the (internal) service designs and standards
do not match the service requirements as perceived by the service provider. For example, the customer expects a quick restart of the system, while the standard procedure of the maintenance organization is focused on analyzing the reason for the crash.
The maintenance activities as specified in the service level agreement have to be planned. This includes the planning of the activities themselves, the transfer of the results to the customer, the planning of releases, the estimation of resources needed, the scheduling of maintenance activities, and the identification of possible risks. Explicitly basing the planning of maintenance activities on the commitments as agreed with the customer helps to close this gap.
Gap 3 The actual service delivery differs from the specified services. This is often caused by deficiencies in human resource policies, failures to match demand and supply, and customers not fulfilling their role. For example, customers may bypass the helpdesk by phoning the maintainer of their system directly, thereby hindering a proper incident management process.
The service level agreement states which maintenance activities are to be carried out, and how fast, reliably, etc. this should be done. In order to be able to report on the performance of the maintenance organization in this respect, information about the actual maintenance activities must be gathered. This information can be used to monitor maintenance activities and take corrective actions if necessary.
For example, when the customer reports a bug, information about the bug itself (originator, type, etc.) is recorded, as well as the reporting time, the time when corrective action was started and ended, and the time when the bug was reported as fixed. If these data indicate that the average downtime of a system exceeds the level as specified in the service level agreement, the maintenance organization might assign more maintenance staff to this system, put maintenance staff on point-duty at the customer site, renegotiate the agreed upon service level, or take other action to realign agreement and reality.
By keeping a strict eye upon the performance of the maintenance organization and adjusting the maintenance planning or renegotiating the commitments with the customer when required, gap 3 is narrowed.
Gap 4 Communication about the service does not match the actual service delivery. This may be caused by ineffective management of customer expectations, promising too much, or ineffective horizontal communication. For example, a customer is not informed about the repair of a bug he reported.
An important instrument to help close this gap is event management. Event management concerns the management of events that cause or might cause the maintenance activities carried out to deviate from the levels as promised in the service level agreement. An event is either a change request, such as a user request for a new feature, or an incident. Incidents are software bugs and other hazards that the maintenance organization has promised to deal with, such as, say, a server being down.
The main purpose of event management is to manage all those events. To do so, an event management library system is employed, often in the form of a helpdesk system. The event management library system provides for the storage, update, and retrieval of event records, and the sharing and transfer of event records between parties involved. This event management library system supports the communication with the customer about maintenance services delivered. It is also a highly valuable memory for the maintainers: they may use the event library to search for similar incidents, to see why certain components were changed before, etc. 
Since the fifth gap is caused by the four other gaps, perceived service quality can be improved by closing those first four gaps, thus bringing the perceived quality in line with the expected quality. Since software maintenance organizations are essentially service providers, they need to consider the above issues. They need to manage their product -- software maintenance -- as a service in order to be able to deliver high quality.
	14.5.3	Control of Maintenance Tasks
Careful control of the product is necessary during software development. The vast amount of information has to be kept under control. Documentation must be kept consistent and up-to-date. An appropriate scheme for doing so is provided by the set of procedures that make up configuration control; see chapter 4. Configuration control pays particular attention to the handling of change requests. Since handling change requests is what maintenance is all about, configuration control is of vital importance during maintenance.
Effective maintenance depends on following a rigorous methodology, not only with respect to the implementation of changes agreed upon, but also with respect to the way change is controlled. Following IEEE Standard 1219, we suggest the following orderly, well-documented process for controlling changes during maintenance:
1.	Identify and classify change requests Each change request (CR) is given a unique identification number and is classified into one of the maintenance categories (corrective, adaptive, perfective, preventive). The CR is analyzed to decide whether it will be accepted, rejected, or needs further evaluation. This analysis also results in a first cost estimate. The CR is finally prioritized and scheduled for implementation.
2.	Analysis of change requests This step starts with an analysis of the CR to determine its impact on the system, the organization, and possible interfacing systems. Several alternative solutions to implement the CR may be devised, including their cost and schedule. The results of the analysis are documented in a report. Based on this report, a decision is made whether or not the CR will be implemented. The authority for this decision is usually assigned to the configuration control board; see also chapter 4.
3.	Implement the change This involves the design, implementation and testing of the change. The output of this step is a new version of the system, fully tested, and well documented.
The above steps indicate a maintenance model in which each change request is carefully analyzed and, if (and only if) the request is approved, its implementation is carried out in a disciplined, orderly way, including a proper update of the documentation. This control scheme fits in well with the iterative-enhancement model of software maintenance; see figure 14.16. The essence of the iterativeenhancement model is that the set of documents is modified starting with the highest-level document affected by the changes, propagating the changes down through the full set of documents. For example, if a change request necessitates a design change, then the design is changed first. Only as a consequence of the design change will the code be adapted.
 
Figure 14.16	Iterative-enhancement model of	software	maintenance	(Source: V.R.
Basili, Viewing maintenance as reuse-oriented software development, IEEE Software 7, 1 (1990)
19--25, 1990 IEEE.)
Reality is often different. Figure 14.17 depicts the so-called quick-fix model of software maintenance. In the quick-fix model, you take the source code, make the necessary changes to the code and recompile the system to obtain a new version. The source-code documentation and other higher-level documents get updated after the code has been fixed, and usually only if time permits.
 
Figure 14.17 Quick-fix model of software maintenance (Source: V.R. Basili, Viewing maintenance as reuse-oriented software development, IEEE Software 7, 1 (1990) 19--25, 1990 IEEE.)
In the latter scheme, patches are made upon patches and the structure of the system degrades rather quickly. Because of the resulting increase in system complexity and inconsistency of documents, future maintenance becomes much more difficult. To be realistic, the quick-fix model cannot be completely circumvented. In an emergency situation there is but one thing that matters: getting the system up and running again as fast as possible. Where possible though, the quick-fix model should be avoided. If it is used at all, preventive maintenance activities should be scheduled to repair the structural damage done.
In a normal, non-emergency situation, change requests are often bundled into releases. The user then does not get a new version after each and every change has been realized, but after a certain number of change requests has been handled, or after a certain time frame. Three common ways of deciding on the contents and timing of the next release are:
fixed staff and variable schedule. In this scheme, there is a fixed number of people available for the maintenance work. The next release date is fixed in advance. Often, the release dates are scheduled at fixed time intervals, say every six months. The next release will contain all changes that have been handled within the agreed time frame. So the next release is always on time. There also is some flexibility as to the contents of the next release, since the maintainers and the customer do not fix the contents in advance.
variable staff and fixed schedule. Here, a release date is fixed in advance. The portfolio of change requests to be handled in this release is also negotiated and fixed in advance. Next, the number of people needed to implement the changes within the fixed time frame is decided. On the way, some renegotiation of both the contents and the schedule is possible. An advantage of this scheme is that change requests are assigned clear priorities and that communication with the customer about the contents of the next release is enforced.
variable staff and variable schedule. As in the previous scheme, the portfolio of change requests to be handled in the next release is negotiated and fixed in advance. Then, the cost and schedule for this release are negotiated, and the number of maintainers required to achieve it is determined. This scheme requires more planning and oversight than the other two schemes. It is also likely to better accommodate the customer. As with ordinary development, schedule slippages and contents renegotiation are not uncommon in this scheme.
14.5.4	Quality Issues
Changing software impairs its structure. By a conscious application of software quality assurance procedures during maintenance, we may limit the negative effects. If we know the software quality factors that affect maintenance effort and cost, we may measure those factors and take preventive actions accordingly. In particular, such metrics can be used to guide decisions as to when to start a major overhaul of components or complete systems.
Quality control issues get quite some attention during software development. Software quality assurance however should broaden its scope to maintenance as well. The implementation of changes during maintenance requires the same level of quality assurance as development work. The ingredients of software quality assurance procedures, as discussed in chapter 6, apply equally well to software maintenance.
Software quality assurance can be backed up by measurements that quantify quality aspects. With respect to maintenance, we may focus on measures which specifically relate to maintenance effort, such as counting defects reported, change requests issued, effort spent on incorporating changes, complexity metrics, etc.
Relationships between such measures can then be sought. Observed trends can be used to initiate actions, such as:
If maintenance efforts correlate well with complexity metrics like Henri and Kafuras Information Flow or McCabes cyclomatic complexity (see chapter 12), then these complexity metrics may be used to trigger preventive maintenance. Various studies have indeed found such correlations.
If certain modules require frequent changes or much effort to realize changes, then a re-design of such modules should be given serious consideration.
Metrics can be used to spot bad smells, and initiate refactoring.
A particularly relevant issue during maintenance is to decide when to reengineer. At a certain point in time, evolving an old system becomes next to impossible and a major reengineering effort is required or the system enters the servicing stage. There are no hard figures on which to decide this, but certain system characteristics certainly indicate system degradation:
Frequent system failures;
Code over seven years old;
Overly-complex program structure and logic flow;
Code written for previous generation hardware;
Running in emulation mode;
Very large modules or subroutines;
Excessive resource requirements;
Hard-coded parameters that are subject to change;
Difficulty in keeping maintenance personnel;
Seriously deficient documentation;
Missing or incomplete design specifications.
The greater the number of such characteristics present, the greater the potential for redesign.
Improvements in software maintenance requires insight into factors that determine maintenance cost and effort. Software metrics provide such insight. To measure is to know. By carefully collecting and interpreting maintenance data, we may discover the major cost drivers of software maintenance and initiate actions to improve both quality and productivity.
	14.6	Summary
Software maintenance encompasses all modifications to a software product after delivery. The following breakdown of maintenance activities is usually made:
Corrective maintenance concerns the correction of faults.
Adaptive maintenance deals with adapting software to changes in the environment.
 
14.7. FURTHER READING
Perfective maintenance mainly deals	with	accommodating	new	or	changed	user requirements.
Preventive maintenance concerns activities aimed at increasing a systems maintainability.
Real maintenance, the correction of faults, consumes approximately 25% of maintenance effort. By far the larger part of software maintenance concerns the evolution of software. This evolution is inescapable. Software models part of reality. Reality changes, and so does the software that models it.
Major causes of maintenance problems were discussed in section 14.2: the existence of a vast amount of unstructured code, insufficient knowledge about the system or application domain on the part of maintenance programmers, insufficient documentation, and the bad image of the software maintenance department.
Some of these problems are accidental and can be remedied by proper actions. Through a better organization and management of software maintenance, substantial quality and productivity improvements can be realized. These issues were discussed in section 14.5. Obviously, improved maintenance should start with improved development. Opportunities to improve the development process are a major topic in most chapters of this book.
A particularly relevant issue for software maintenance is that of reverse engineering, the process of reconstructing a lost blueprint. Before changes can be realized, the maintainer has to gain an understanding of the system. Since the majority of operational code is unstructured and undocumented, this is a major problem. Section 14.3 addresses reverse engineering, its limitations, and tools to support it.
The fundamental problem is that maintenance will remain a big issue. Because of the changes made to software, its structure degrades. Specific attention to preventive maintenance activities aimed at improving system structure are needed from time to time to fight system entropy.
Software maintenance used to be a rather neglected topic in the software engineering literature. Like programmers, researchers are more attracted to developing new, fancy methods and tools for software development. This situation has changed. Major journals regularly feature articles on software maintenance, there is an annual IEEE Conference on Software Maintenance (since 1985), and the journal Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and Practice (launched 1989) is wholly devoted to it.
14.7	Further Reading
(Pigoski, 1996) is a text book wholly devoted to software maintenance. Lientz and Swanson (1980) is a seminal booklet on software maintenance. It introduces the widely-known categories of maintenance tasks and provides data on their distribution. More recent data on the distribution of maintenance tasks are given in (Nosek and Palvia, 1990), (Dekleva, 1992) and (Sousa and Mozeira, 1998). Chapin et al. (2001) gives a new classification of maintenance categories, including a separate category for user support. The maintenance life cycle stages are discussed in (Burch and Kung, 1997) and (Kung and Hsu, 1998). The distinction between an evolution stage and a servicing stage stems from (Bennett and Rajlich, 2000). The distribution of code-related maintenance activities is discussed in (Yu and Chen, 2006). The practice of software maintenance is discussed in (Singer, 1998) and (Tan and Gable, 1998).
The various types of reverse engineering are discussed in (Chikofsky and Cross II, 1990). The 100% functional equivalence issue in reverse engineering is discussed in (Bennett, 1998). Reverse engineering tools are discussed in (Biggerstaff et al., 1994), (Jarzabek and Wang, 1998) and (Bellay and Gall, 1998). Fowler (1999) is the standard text for refactorinig. Mens and Tourwe (2004) provide a survey of software refactoring. Migration is discussed in (Rahgozar and Oroumchian, 2003) and (Bisbal et al., 1999). Programming plans and beacons were originally proposed in (Soloway and Ehrlich, 1984) and (Brooks, 1983). Research addressing the role of these concepts in program comprehension processes is described in (von Mayrhauser and Vans, 1995) and (von Mayrhauser et al., 1997). LaToza et al. (2006) discusses developer work habits, including code comprehension, during development and evolution. Example tools to help software maintenance include (Singer et al., 2005) (support for browsing through software), (Rysselberghe and Demeyer, 2004) (visualize change history) and (Ducasse et al., 2006) (visualization of distribution of system properties).
Grba and Ducasse (2006) provide an overview of types of software evolution analysis. The distinction between version-centered and history-centered analysis is made in that article. Grba et al. (2004) discusses the yesterdays weather approach to reverse engineering. Fischer and Gall (2004) and Greevy et al. (2006) discuss history-centered analysis.
Possible organizations of maintenance activities as well as their major advantages and disadvantages are discussed in (Swanson and Beath, 1990). Yeh and Jeng (2002) discuss the influence of departmentalization on software maintenance. The service perspective on software maintenance is discussed in (Niessink and van Vliet, 1999). The translation hereof into a Capability Maturity Model aimed at maintenance processes is described in (Niessink and van Vliet, 1998a).
The IEEE Process model for software maintenance is described in (IEEE1219, 1992). The iterative-enhancement and quick-fix models of software maintenance are discussed in (Basili, 1990). Approaches to scheduling releases are the topic of (Stark and Oman, 1997).
The cost of software maintenance, and empirical relations between quality aspects and cost are the topic of (Banker et al., 1993), (Kemerer and Slaughter, 1997), (Henry and Cain, 1997) and (Niessink and van Vliet, 1997). Indicators of system degradation are given in (Martin and Osborne, 1983).
Exercises
1. Define the following terms: corrective maintenance, adaptive maintenance, perfective maintenance, and preventive maintenance.
14.7. FURTHER READING
2.	Discuss the major causes of software maintenance problems.
3.	What is reverse engineering?
4.	What is refactoring?
5.	Characterize the evolution and servicing stage of software maintenance.
6.	What is the difference between design recovery and redocumentation?
7.	Characterize the version-oriented analysis and history-centered analysis of software evolution data.
8.	Why does corrective maintenance have more service-like aspects than product-like aspects?
9.	Discuss the iterative-enhancement and quick-fix models of software maintenance.
10.	Discuss the major impediments to fully-automated design recovery.
11.	Discuss advantages of software configuration control support during software maintenance.
12.	Discuss the possible structure and role of an acceptance test by the maintenance organization prior to the release of a system.
13.	An alternative classification of maintenance and development activities is as follows:
Functional maintenance = corrective maintenance adaptive maintenance non-functional perfective maintenance (i.e. improving quality) replacement of a system by a functional equivalent.
Functional development = functional perfective maintenance (i.e. adding new features) development of new systems.
Could this classification provide us with a better picture of the real maintenance effort? See also (Krogstie, 1994).
14.	Assess opportunities of knowledge-based support for software maintenance (see (Devanbu et al., 1991) for a very interesting application of such ideas).
15.	Give a primary classification of your maintenance organization as W-, A-, or L-Type (see figure 14.12). What are the major strengths and weaknesses of your particular organization?
16.	Does your organization collect quantitative data on maintenance activities? If so, what type of data, and how are they used to guide and improve the

maintenance process? If not, how is maintenance planned and controlled?
17.	Study the technical documentation of a system whose development you have been involved in. Does the documentation capture the design rationale? In what ways does it support comprehension of the system? In hindsight, can you suggest ways to improve the documentation for the purpose of maintenance?
18.	Discuss the impact of component reuse on maintainability.
19.	Discuss the possible contribution of object-oriented software development to software maintenance.
20.	Can you think of reasons why a 10% change in a program of 200 LOC would take more effort than a 20% change in a program of 100 LOC?
 
15 Software Tools
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To be able to distinguish various dimensions along which tools can be classified
To be aware of the major trends in (collections of) software tools
To appreciate the role of tools in the software development process
Software development is generally supported by tools, ranging from tools supporting a single activity to integrated environments supporting a complete development process. In this chapter we discuss the main classes of software development tools and their role in the development process.
The demand for software grows faster than the increase in software development productivity and available manpower. The result is an ever-increasing shortage of personnel; we are less and less able to satisfy the quest for software. To turn the tide, we must look for techniques that result in significant productivity gains.
One of the most obvious routes to pursue is automation itself. We may use the computer as a tool in the production of software. In the past, all sorts of things were automated, save software development itself. Programmers knew better than that.
We have long been accustomed to employ the computer as a tool for the implementation of software. To this end, programmers have a vast array of tools at their disposal, such as compilers, linkers and loaders. Also during testing, tools like test drivers and test harnesses have been used for a long time. The development of tools to support earlier phases of the software life cycle is more recent. One example of the latter is software to aid the drawing and validation of UML diagrams.
The use of software tools may have a positive effect on both the productivity of the people involved and the quality of the product being developed. Tools may support checking conformance to standards. Tools may help to quantify the degree of testing. Tools may support progress tracking. And so on.
The application of tools in the software development process is referred to as Computer Aided Software Engineering (CASE). Apart from the traditional implementation and test tools, CASE has a relatively short history. The first tools to support design activities appeared in the early 1980s. Today, the number of CASE products is overwhelming.
As the number of available CASE products proliferates, it becomes expedient to classify them. One way of doing so is according to the breadth of support they offer. Figure 15.1 gives a classification of CASE products along this dimension. Some products support a specific task in the software development process. Others support the entire software process. The former are called tools, the latter environments. In between these two extremes it is useful to identify CASE products that support a limited set of activities, such as those which comprise the analysis and design stages. Such a coherent set of tools with a limited scope is referred to as a workbench.
Environments can be further classified according to the mechanism that ties together the individual tools that make up the environment. In a toolkit, tools are generally not well integrated. The support offered is independent of a specific programming language or development paradigm. A toolkit merely offers a set of useful building blocks. A language-centered environment contains tools specifically suited for the support of software development in a specific programming language. Such an environment may be hand-crafted or generated from a grammatical description of
 
	CASE product	supports
 
	Figure 15.1	Classification of CASE products
the language. In the latter case, the environment tends to focus on the manipulation of program structures.
The essence of integrated and process-centered environments is the sharing of information between the tools that make up the environment. Integrated environments focus on the resulting product. The heart of an integrated environment is a data repository, containing a wealth of information on the product to be developed, from requirements up to running code. Process-centered environments focus on sharing a description of the software development process.
Obviously, classifying actual CASE products according to this framework is not always easy. For example, many environments that span the complete life cycle evolved from workbenches that supported either front-end activities (analysis and global design) or back-end activities (implementation and test). These environments tend to contain tools specifically geared at supporting tasks from the corresponding part of the life cycle, augmented by a more general support for the other phases (such as for editing, text processing, or database access).
The framework of figure 15.1 classifies CASE products according to the parts of the life cycle they support. Figure 15.2 lists a number of dimensions along which CASE products can be classified. Using all of these dimensions to classify a CASE product yields a faceted classification scheme, which provides more information and is more flexible than the one-dimensional framework of figure 15.1.
No development method is suited for all classes of problems. Likewise, there is no CASE product for all problem classes. Specific properties of a given class of problems will impact the tools for that class. An important property of embedded systems is that the software is often developed on some host machine which is different from the ultimate target machine. Specific tools will be required for the development of such systems, for instance tools that allow us to test the software on the host machine.
 
	Dimension	Typical values
Breadth of support	Tool, workbench, or environment Class of problem	Embedded, business, real-time, . . .
	Size of system	Small, medium, or large
	User scale	Individual, family, city, or state
	Number of sites	1,
	Process scale	Product, people, or product-and-people
	Process support	None, fixed, or variable
	Execution paradigm	State machine, Petri net, production rules, procedures, . . .
	Figure 15.2	Faceted classification structure for CASE products
For many business applications, the human--computer interaction plays a prominent role, while the requirements analysis of such systems tends to be problematic. A development environment for such systems had better contain tools that support those aspects (analyst workbench, prototyping facilities, and facilities to generate screen layouts).
As a final example, when developing real-time software, it would be preferable to have tools that allow us to analyze system performance at an early stage.
A second dimension relates the set of tools to the size of the system to be developed. In practice, it shows that tool usage increases with problem size. For a small project, we may confine ourselves to a simple configuration control system, simple test tools, and a shared database system to store documents. In a medium-sized project, more advanced support could be used, such as a structured database with objects like design documentation, test plans, or code components. Certain relations between objects, such as A uses B, or A implements B, could be maintained. For a medium-sized project, the toolset would also include tools to support management tasks, for example to create CPM or PERT charts. For a large project, we may require that the tools be mutually compatible. The toolset for a large project will generally also impose more constraints on their users.
The user scale refers to the number of users the product supports. Not surprisingly, the user-scale dimension is closely related to the system size dimension. Larger systems require larger development teams, dont they? Using a sociological paradigm, possible values along the user-scale dimension are called individual, family, city and state. Some products support the individual developer. These products are dominated by issues of software construction. The emphasis is on tools that support software construction: editors, debuggers, compilers, etc. CASE products that offer configuration management and system build facilities can be classified as belonging to the family model of software development environments. In the family model, a great deal of freedom is left to the individual developer, while a number of rules are agreed upon to regulate critical interactions between developers.
This model is not appropriate any more if projects get really big. Larger populations require more complicated rules and restrictions on individual freedom. Within my family, a few simple rules suffice (Jasper and Marieke take turns in washing dishes), and adjustments and local deviations are easily established (Jasper has a party today and asks Marieke to take over). Within a large company, policies have to be more strictly obeyed and cooperation between individuals is enforced (like in a city). Likewise, toolsets to support the development of large systems should enforce the proper cooperation between individual developers.
A state may be viewed as a collection of cities. A company may be viewed as a collection of projects. In the state model, the main concern is with commonality and standardization, to allow developers to switch between projects, to be able to reuse code, designs, test plans, etc.
If development is done at more than one site, we need tools to facilitate collaboration and coordination. On one hand, tools like those for configuration management and requirements management need to provide support to coordinate development work at multiple sites. On the other hand, tools from the realm of Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) could be part of the tool suite. This dimension is also closely related to the user-scale and system size dimension, since larger projects tend to be distributed over multiple sites; see also chapter ??.
The process scale specifies whether the CASE product supports code production activities, people activities, or both. CASE products focusing on code production concentrate on support for the evolution of software. They contain tools to write, compile, test, debug, and configure code. These are all activities done by a computer. Other CASE products concentrate on personnel interactions, such as the scheduling of review meetings. Still others do both. Values along this axis may be termed product, people, and product-and-people.
CASE products may or may not support the development process. If the development process is supported, some tools do so on the basis of a predefined model of the process. Others allow the user to define his own process model. If the CASE product supports the development process, it may employ various internal means to guide the execution (or enactment) of the development process, such as state machines, Petri nets, production rules, or procedures.
The various approaches to collections of software tools are addressed in sections 15.1 to 15.4, using the simple classification scheme of figure 15.1. Toolkits are discussed in section 15.1. UNIX is a prime example from this category. Section 15.2 discusses language-centered environments. This encompasses both environments created manually around some given programming language, and environments generated from a grammatical description of the program structures being manipulated. In both cases, the support offered mostly concerns the individual programmer. Section 15.3 and 15.4 discuss integrated and process-centered environments, respectively. Since most workbenches may be viewed as trimmed-down integrated environments, workbenches are discussed in section 15.3 as well.
The discussion below is fairly global in nature. We will skim over details of individual tools. Our aim is to sketch discernible trends in this area and to have a critical look at the possible role of tools in the software development process.
	15.1	Toolkits
With a toolkit, developers are supported by a rather loosely-coupled collection of tools, each of which serves a specific, well-defined, task. The analogy with a carpenter is obvious. His toolkit contains hammers, screwdrivers, a saw, and the like. These tools each serve a specific task. However, they are not integrated in the way a drill and its attachments are.
The prime example of a toolkit environment is UNIX. UNIX may be viewed as a general support environment, not aimed at one specific programming language, development method, or process model. UNIX offers a number of very convenient, yet very simple, building blocks with which more complicated things can be realized (Kernighan and Mashey, 1981):
The file system is a tree. The leafs of this tree are the files, while inner nodes correspond to directories. A specific file can be addressed absolutely or relative to the current directory. The addressing is through a pathname, analogous to the selection of method names in Java. Directories are files too, though the user cannot change their contents.
Files have a very simple structure. A file is but a sequence of characters (bytes). So there are no physical or logical records, there is no distinction between random access files and sequential access files, and there are no file types.
An I/O device is a file too; if it is opened, it automatically activates a program which handles the traffic with that device. In this way, a user may write programs without knowing (or, indeed, without having to know) where the input comes from or where the output goes to.
All system programs (and most user programs) assume that input comes from the users terminal, while the output is again written to that terminal. The user can easily redirect both input and output. Through a call of the form
	prog	in	out
input is read from file in, while output is written to file out. The program itself need not be changed.
UNIX offers its users a very large set of small, useful, programs. To name but a few: wc counts the number of lines, words and characters in files, lpr prints files, grep does pattern matching.
15.2. LANGUAGE-CENTERED ENVIRONMENTS
UNIX programs can easily be combined to form larger programs. If the output of one program is to serve as input to another program, they can be connected through a pipe, denoted by  :
	ls	pr
makes a list of all file names and subsequently prints that list. There is no need for an auxiliary file to store intermediate results.
In this way, users are led to try to reach their goals by gluing existing components together, rather than writing a program from scratch. A disadvantage of UNIX is that there is little consistency in interfaces and the choice of command names. For different programs, the -k option, say, may well mean something rather different. To stop a dialogue, you may try kill, stop, quit, end, leave, and a few others. If you get tired, CTRL-c is likely to work too.
The average UNIX user knows only a fairly limited subset of the available commands and tools (Fischer, 1986). It is quite likely that, after a while, a workable set of commands will be known and used, and then the learning process stops. Inevitably, the facilities offered under UNIX are far from optimally used.
In UNIX, the different tools have minimal knowledge of the objects they manipulate. Various integrated and process-centered environments have been built on top of UNIX. They make use of the attractive features of UNIX, but try to overcome its disadvantages by imposing more structure.
Besides tools that support the individual programmer, UNIX also offers support for programming-in-the-large, through configuration management and system build facilities like SCCS and Make. These will be discussed in section 15.3.2.
15.2	Language-Centered Environments
Nowadays, most software is developed interactively, changes are made interactively, and programs are tested and executed interactively. Much research in the area of language-centered environments is aimed at developing a collection of useful, userfriendly, effective tools for this type of activity. Since most of these environments focus on supporting programming tasks, this type of environment is often called a programming environment. To emphasize their graphic capabilities to manipulate program constructs, they are sometimes called visual programming environments.
Environments that are built around a specific programming language exploit the fact that a program entails more than a mere sequence of characters. Programs have a clear structure. This structure can be used to make the editing process more effective, to handle debugging in a structured way, and the like. Knowledge of properties of the objects to be manipulated can be built into the tools and subsequently used by these tools. Well-known early examples of language-centered environments are Interlisp and the Smalltalk-80 environment.
Present-day language-centered environments generally come with a host of components that considerably ease software development. Examples of such environments include Microsoft Studio .NET and Eclipse. The support offered ranges from a set of APIs for generating user interfaces (such as Swing), to facilities for handling persistence (EJB) or create web applications (Ajax). The richness of features comes with a price: a rather long learning curve.
	15.3	Integrated Environments and Workbenches
This section is devoted to CASE products that support (parts of) the software development process. Depending on the scope of the set of tools available, such an environment is called an Analyst WorkBench (AWB), a Programmer WorkBench (PWB), a Management WorkBench (MWB), or an Integrated Project Support Environment (IPSE); see also figure 15.3. The acronym CASE (Computer-Aided Software Engineering) is often used to indicate any type of tool support in the software development process. The qualified terms Upper-CASE and Lower-CASE refer to tool support during the analysis--design and implementation--test phases, respectively.
In the ideal case, the choice of a specific set of tools will be made as follows. First, a certain approach to the software development process is selected. Next, techniques are selected that support the various phases in that development process. As a last step, tools are selected that support those techniques. Some steps in the development process may not be supported by well-defined techniques. Some techniques may not be supported by tools. Thus, a typical development environment will have a pyramid shape as in figure 15.4.
In practice, we often find the reverse conical form: a barely-developed model of the development process, few well-defined techniques, and a lot of tools. In this way, the benefits of the tools will be limited at best. To paraphrase the situation: for many a CASE, there is a lot of Computer-Aided, and precious little Software Engineering.
The different tool sets identified above are discussed in the subsections to follow.
	15.3.1	Analyst WorkBenches
Analyst workbenches serve to support the activities in the early phases of software development: requirements engineering and (global) design. In these phases, analysis and design data is gathered. Often, a graphical image of the system is made, for instance in the form of a set of UML diagrams. From a practical point of view, important problems concern the drawing and redrawing of those diagrams and guarding the consistency and completeness of the data gathered. AWB tools specifically address these points.
The kernel of an AWB is a database in which the information gathered is stored. The structure of the database can be rather free, or it can be derived from the techniques supported. The AWB will also contain tools to support the following types of activity:
 
 
	Figure 15.3	Scope of tool sets
 
Figure 15.4	Support in a typical development environment Drawing, changing and manipulation of pictures. This may vary from simple drawing programs that have no knowledge of the pictures semantics, to programs that have an elaborate knowledge of the semantics of the drawing technique in question. As far as the latter is concerned, we may think of automatic generation of pointers to subpictures, the automatic reconfiguration of pictures to circumvent intersecting lines, and the like. If the drawing technique has been sufficiently formalized, the user support can be comparable to that offered by a syntax-directed editor for programming languages.
Analysis of data produced, as regards consistency and completeness. The possibilities of doing this are strongly dependent upon the degree to which the drawing technique itself imposes strict rules. There is a choice as to when this checking takes place. If the user is immediately notified when an error is made, there is little chance for errors to cascade. On the other hand, the freedom to play during the exploratory development stages is also limited. If checking is done at a later stage, the user may continue on the wrong track for quite a while before detection, and it then becomes more difficult to identify the proper error messages.
Managing information. A prime example is managing requirements. A simple way is to store them in a plain text document. More advanced tools allow for maintaining relations between requirements, tracing requirements to design documents, detecting and handling conflicts, and the like.
Generating reports and documentation. It is important to be able to adapt the precise form of reports and documentation to the requirements of the user. For instance, internal standards of some organization may enforce certain report formats. It should be possible to configure the tools to adhere to these standards.
Further tools of an AWB may support, amongst others, prototyping, the generation of user interfaces, or the generation of executable code. Post et al. (1998) found that users perceive two types of (Upper-CASE) tool: those that are good at supporting analysis and design tasks and those that are good at code generation and prototyping. Apparently, the tools tend to emphasize one of these uses.
	15.3.2	Programmer Workbenches
A programmer workbench consists of a set of tools to support the implementation and test phases of software development. The term originated in the UNIX world (Dolotta et al., 1978). The support offered by UNIX mainly concerns these types of activity. Many programming environments constructed around a certain programming language also support these phases in particular. In a PWB, we find tools to support, amongst others:
	editing and analysis of programs;
	debugging;
	generation of test data;
	simulation;
	test coverage determination.
The tools that support teamwork on large projects deserve our special attention. In a typical environment, a group of programmers will be working on the same system. The system will have many components, developed, tested, and changed by different people. During the evolution of the system, different versions of components will result. Automatic support for the control of such a set of components, both technically and organizationally, is a sheer necessity.
One of the early systems for configuration control is the Source Code Control System (SCCS), originally developed for IBM OS and best known from UNIX. SCCS enables the user to keep track of modifications in files (which may contain such diverse things as program code, documentation, or test sets). The system enables the user to generate any version of the system. New versions can be generated without old versions being lost. Important aspects of SCCS are:
	no separate copies of versions are kept: only the modifications (so-called deltas) to previous versions are stored;
	access to files is protected: only authorized users can make changes;
	each	file	is	identified	by	author,	version	number,	and	date	and	time	of modification;
	the system asks the user for information on the reason for a change, which change is made, where, and by whom.
Figure 15.5 illustrates the main operations provided by SCCS. Within SCCS, all information is kept in so-called s-files. The operation create creates the s-file for the first time. If the original file is named prog, then the SCCS file is named s.prog. The operation get yields a read-only copy of the file requested. This read-only copy can be used for compiling, printing, and the like. It is not intended to be edited. The operation edit retrieves a copy to be edited. SCCS takes care of protection in the sense that only one person can be editing a file at one time. Finally, the delta operation stores the revised version of the file edited.
Versions of SCCS files are numbered, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.1, etc. The number to the left of the period is the major version number (release number). The number to the right of the period is the minor version number. The first version is numbered 1.1. By default, get and edit retrieve the latest version of a file, while delta results in an increase of the minor version number. If an older version is required or the major version number is to be increased, this must be specified explicitly.
 
	Figure 15.5	Main operations of SCCS
The above scheme results in a linear sequence of versions. SCCS also provides the possibility of creating branches (forks), as illustrated in figure 15.6. For example, starting from version 1.2 we may create versions 1.3, 1.4, etc to represent normal development of a system component, and versions 1.2.1.1, 1.2.1.2, etc to represent bug fixes in version 1.2. In SCCS, the merging of development paths must be done manually.
When different versions of the same system are maintained in this way, the need to automate the construction of new executable versions arises. Make is a tool that does this (Feldman, 1978). Make uses a description of the various components of a system and their mutual dependencies. When generating a new executable system, Make inspects the date and time of the latest changes to components and only recompiles components when needed (i.e. components that have been changed since the last compilation). A tool like Make not only saves machine time, but also ensures that the most recent version of each component is used.
The basic functionality of configuration control systems has not fundamentally changed since the development of SCCS in the early 1970s. Rather than keeping a copy of each version, SCCS and similar systems only keep track of what has changed from the previous version (the so-called deltas). Nowadays, disk storage is not an issue anymore, and many software configuration systems use simple zip-like compression instead of deltas. Additional features offered in present-day systems are mainly directed at increasing the flexibility and usability of such systems:
 
	Figure 15.6	Forking and merging of development paths
The ability to symbolically tag file versions. If the repair of some bug requires changes in a number of modules, each of these revised modules may be given the same tag, say bug27. In a subsequent build of the system, this tag bug27 may then be used to reference file versions in which this bug has been taken care of. This frees the user from the need to remember that the bug concerns version 1.12 of module A, 1.3.1.7 of module B, etc.
The ability to automatically merge branches. This is by no means a fool-proof operation and should be used with care. The possibility of merging branches hinges on the availability of appropriate merge tools. If changes are made in disjoint parts of a file, merge tools can generally merge these changes fully automatically.
Flexible support for multiple developers working on the same system. In SCCS, only one person can be editing a file at a time. This rather restrictive scheme is known as reserved checkout. It may unnecessarily restrict the work in a team. For example, one developer may check out a file he is not going to work on until next week. However, the fact that he did so prevents other developers from working on that file during this week. In another model, known as unreserved checkout, each developer has a working copy of a file. After a while, one developer writes back his updated copy of that file, and other developers will be notified if they want to do the same. These other developers will then, one by one, have to merge their changes with the already updated copy.
Management of workspaces. Checked-out files are put in a workspace. This may be as simple as the home directory of a developer, or be more complex and be supported by additional tooling. For instance, next to the files a developer is about to change, depending files that are needed to compile and test changes may be automatically downloaded as well.
Support for communication within a development team. For example, if one developer checks out a file someone else is already working on, he may be given a notification of this, so that the developers can start a dialog and coordinate their activities. The latter type of support connects the pure archival function of configuration control systems with the communication and coordination functions of workflow management systems.
Language-centered environments as discussed in section 15.2 support the individual developer. These environments are dominated by issues of software construction. The emphasis is on tools that support software construction: editors, debuggers, compilers, etc. Toolsets that offer configuration management and system build facilities like those offered by SCCS and Make can be classified as belonging to the family model of software development environments: a great deal of freedom is left to the individual developers, while a number of rules are agreed upon to regulate critical interactions between developers.
Most programmer workbenches offer this family type of support. For example, Make assumes that files whose names end in .c are C source files. Members of the development family follow this rule and may even have agreed upon further naming conventions. The development environment however has no way of enforcing those rules. It is up to management to make sure that the rules are followed.
	15.3.3	Management WorkBenches
A management workbench contains tools that assist the manager during planning and control of a software development project. Example tools in an MWB include:
Configuration control Besides the control of software components as discussed in the previous section, we may also think of the control of other project-specific information, like design and analysis data, or documentation. An essential aspect of this type of configuration control concerns the control of change requests. Changes are proposed, assessed, approved or rejected, given a priority and cost estimate, planned, and executed. The corresponding procedures are described in a configuration control plan. The administration and workflow of those change requests may well be supported through a tool. See also chapter 4.
Work assignment Given a number of components, their mutual dependencies, and resources needed (both people and hardware), tools can be used to determine critical paths in the network of tasks, and work packages may be assigned accordingly. This is a central feature of process-centered environments; see section 15.4.
Cost estimation Various quantitative cost-estimation models have been developed. These models yield cost estimates, based on project characteristics. Tools have been developed that assist in gathering quantitative project data, calibrating cost-estimation models based on these data, and making cost estimates for new projects.
 
15.4. PROCESS-CENTERED ENVIRONMENTS
15.3.4	Integrated Project Support Environments
An Integrated Project Support Environment is meant to support all phases of the software life cycle. Thus, such an environment has to contain the various tools as discussed in the previous sections. Environments that span the complete life cycle usually emphasize the support of either front-end activities (analysis and global design -- Upper-CASE) or back-end activities (implementation and testing -- Lower-CASE). They then contain tools specifically geared at supporting tasks from the corresponding part of the life cycle, augmented by a more general support for the other phases (such as for editing, text processing, or database access).
When developing an IPSE, we may strive for either a strong or a weak integration of its tools. A strong integration, as realized in the language-centered environments discussed in section 15.2, has both advantages (like better control capabilities) and disadvantages. One disadvantage is that such an IPSE tends to be less flexible. If the tools are not integrated, as in UNIX, there is more flexibility. On the other hand, a more stringent management control is then needed.
We may also look for intermediate forms. For example, all objects may be stored in the UNIX file system, controlled by SCCS, and the relationships between objects may be represented using a relational database system.
The heart of an integrated environment is the data repository, containing the information shared between the tools that make up the environment. The constraints imposed on the structure of this repository mirror the degree to which the tools are integrated. A stricter integration of tools allows for a stricter definition of the structure of the data they share, and vice versa.
15.4	Process-Centered Environments
In a process-centered software engineering environment (PSEE), a description of the software development process is shared by the tools that make up the environment. Not surprisingly, developments in process-centered environments are closely tied to developments in process modeling, and vice versa. For example, the kinds of description used in process modeling (state transition diagrams, Petri nets, and the like) are also the formalisms used in PSEEs. Process modeling is discussed in section 3.6.
Like an integrated environment, a process-centered environment may cover the complete life cycle. Like an IPSE, a PSEE tends to be geared towards supporting tasks from a specific part of the software development life cycle. Since back-end activities (implementation and testing) are somewhat easier to structure and formalize, work in process modeling and PSEEs has concentrated on modeling and supporting back-end activities, consequently.
Figure 15.7 gives a model of the process of conducting a code review. The notation is that of Petri nets. In section 3.6, this same figure was used to explain the role of different formalisms in process modeling. Here, we will use it to discuss its role in a process-centered software engineering environment.
 
	Figure 15.7	Petri net view of the review process
If the developer indicates that some piece of code is ready for review, the environment is notified and comes into a state as indicated in figure 15.7. Parallel to the coding activity, management schedules a review meeting. Once this is done, the place  labeled review scheduled is marked. The support environment then knows that the review can be held and may offer support for doing so. In this way, the environment guides the developers and other participants through the steps of the review process, alerts them when certain actions are required, maintains status information of code products and other pieces of information, etc. Thus, PSEEs provide support for software development by automating routine tasks, invoking appropriate development tools, and enforcing rules and practices.
Formal models of a software process are rigid. In practice, this rigidity is a hindrance, since there will always be exceptions. For example, the minutes of a review meeting might get lost, management may decide to skip a certain review meeting, a review meeting may have to be rescheduled because some participant got ill, etc. The Petri model of figure 15.7 can not cope with these situations. A number of them can be accommodated by making the model more complex. But the model will never cover all situations. There is thus a need to be able to intervene. Some PSEEs, for example, offer means to update process models on the fly. A fully satisfactory solution is difficult to find, and the rigidity of formal models is likely to continue to conflict with the requirements of flexibility in process support.
This holds the more where it supports the early stages of software development.
A designer or requirements engineer is not helped by an environment that dictates
15.5. SUMMARY
the detailed order of process steps to be taken. Broadly speaking, we may distinguish two types of activity: the unstructured, creative, and cooperative activities that characterize the early stages of software development; and the repetitive and structured activities that characterize the later stages. A similar dichotomy may be observed in PSEEs. PSEEs focusing on the early stages have much in common with groupware and Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) systems. These PSEEs support coordination of activities, such as access to and sharing of information, and cooperation activities, such as communication between people and scheduling meetings. This type of support is becoming increasingly important in present-day multisite development; see also chapter ??. PSEEs focusing on the later stages have much in common with workflow management and configuration control systems. Present-day configuration control systems not only offer the basic versioning and access capabilities known from systems like SCCS (see section 15.3.2) but they also offer ways to define and enact software configuration tasks and policies. Some even claim that configuration management tools are the real PSEEs (Conradi et al., 1998).
15.5	Summary
Developments in the area of (integrated) collections of tools move very fast. For many a facet of the software development process, good tools are available. In this chapter, we have discussed the major developments as regards computer-aided software engineering (CASE). We have done so using a simple, one-dimensional classification of CASE products, which expresses the parts of the life cycle they support:
a tool supports one specific task;
a workbench supports a limited set of activities, such as those which comprise the implementation and testing stages; an environment supports the entire process.
We have further classified environments according to the mechanism that ties together the tools that make up the environment:
In a toolkit, the tools are generally not so well integrated. A toolkit merely offers a set of useful building blocks. UNIX is a prime example of this.
A language-centered environment contains tools specifically aimed at supporting software development in a specific programming language.
An integrated environment contains tools that share information about the resulting product. This information is stored in a data repository, and the tools read and write this repository.
A process-centered environment contains tools that share a description of the software-development process.
Though environments are supposed to cover the entire life cycle, they tend to emphasize certain parts of the process. They then contain tools specifically geared at supporting tasks from that part of the process, augmented by a more general, and often limited, support for the other parts. For example, language-centered environments tend to focus on the implementation and testing stages.
One of the major impediments to the widespread use of tools is their rigidity. Software tools are driven by formal models of what can and can not be done. A tool for requirements engineering is likely to enforce certain rules of well-formedness on the diagrams it handles. A tool to support the testing process is likely to prescribe a certain order of process steps. The requirements engineer, though, may well want to play with ill-formed diagrams for a while. Likewise, the tester may want to deviate from the pre-established order of steps if circumstances require this. The tension between the demands for flexibility of tool users and those for formality of tool builders is one of the major challenging research themes in this area.
In a retrospective of PSEE research, Cugola and Ghezzi (1998) refer to this tension as the minimalist versus maximalist approach. In a maximalist approach, the goal is to model all possible situations. A minimalist approach follows a more lightweight approach, and acknowledges that humans play a decisive role in the decision process. A further corollary is that tools should support cooperation rather than automation.
An interesting open question is whether tools really help. Studies of tool adoption and usage show mixed results. Some conclude that tools offer real improvements, while others conclude that users have not found tools to be helpful. There are definitely certain impediments to tool adoption. Tools cost money, sometimes a lot of money. There also is a learning curve for tool users. Finally, there is quite a gulf between the state of the art as reported in this chapter and the state of the practice.
For many an organizational problem, automation seems to be the panacea. Likewise, the use of tools is often seen as panacea for our problems in software engineering: CASE as prosthesis. Tools, though, remain mere tools. Within the software development process, other factors play a role as well. If the tools do not fit the procedures used within your organization, they are likely to have a far from optimal effect. Also, tools cannot make up for an ineffective development method or badly-qualified personnel. Good people deliver good products and mediocre people deliver mediocre products, irrespective of the tools they use.
	15.6	Further Reading
An early taxonomy of CASE products is given in (Dart et al., 1987). Fuggetta (1993) extended this framework with a category process-centered environments. The latter classification is used in this chapter. Additional dimensions for classifying CASE
